Enteritis is a potential complication of antimicrobial agent use, particularly 
in certain species of rodents. The organism most frequently implicated in this 
disease is Clostridium difficile. Anecdotal information suggests that 
administration of yogurt or other Lactobacillus-containing products in 
conjunction with antimicrobial agents will prevent or minimize the effects of 
antibiotic-associated enteritis. We wanted to determine whether a single 
subcutaneous injection of clindamycin phosphate could induce enteritis in guinea 
pigs and whether a commercial Lactobacillus preparation would ameliorate the 
clinical effects of antibiotic administration in these animals. Juvenile male 
guinea pigs were divided into three treatment groups. Group 1 guinea pigs (n=8) 
received a single saline injection followed by an oral Lactobacillus preparation 
twice daily; group 2 (n=8) received a single antibiotic injection followed by an 
oral Lactobacillus preparation twice daily; group 3 (n=8) received a single 
antibiotic injection. Attitude, body temperature, body weight, and feed and 
water consumption were recorded for each guinea pig 7 days prior to and after 
treatment. Fecal samples were collected and necropsies performed on each guinea 
pig at the time of euthanasia. C. difficile and other enteric pathogens were not 
isolated from any group before or after treatment, although some guinea pigs 
receiving the antibiotic developed enteritis. There were no significant clinical 
differences between guinea pigs receiving antibiotics with the oral 
Lactobacillus preparation, and those receiving antibiotics alone. The results of 
this study suggest that a single injection of clindamycin phosphate can induce 
enteritis in guinea pigs and that oral administration of a 
Lactobacillus-containing product is ineffective in preventing clinical disease 
in guinea pigs administered clindamycin phosphate.
