The objectives of this study were to examine the potential roles of Clostridium 
difficile and enterotoxigenic Clostridium perfringens in diarrhea in dogs by 
comparison of isolation, determination of toxin status via enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and application of multiplex polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR). These techniques were used to evaluate fecal specimens in 132 
healthy and diarrheic dogs. These dogs were prospectively evaluated by grouping 
them into the following 3 categories: hospitalized dogs with diarrhea (n = 32), 
hospitalized dogs without diarrhea (n = 42), and apparently healthy outpatient 
dogs without diarrhea (n = 58). All fecal specimens were cultured using 
selective media for C difficile, Salmonella spp., and Campylobacter spp. and 
selective media after heat shock for C perfringens. No significant difference 
was found in the isolation of C perfringens or C difficile among the 3 groups. A 
significant association was found between the presence of diarrhea and detection 
of C perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) or toxin A via ELISA for both C perfringens 
and C difficile, respectively. PCR performed on C difficile isolates for toxin A 
and toxin B genes revealed no significant differences among the 3 groups, but 
diarrheic dogs were significantly more likely to be positive for the enterotoxin 
gene of C perfringens. Based on the results of this study, the use of ELISA for 
detection of CPE in feces combined with the detection of enterotoxigenic fecal 
isolates obtained via heat shock provides the strongest evidence for the 
presence of C perfringens-associated diarrhea.
