An important consequence of cell swelling is the reorganization of the F-actin 
cytoskeleton in different cell types. We demonstrate in this study by means of 
rhodamine-phalloidin labeling and fluorescence microscopy that a drastic 
reorganization of F-actin occurs in swollen Rat-1 fibroblasts: stress fibers 
disappear and F-actin patches are formed in peripheral extensions at the cell 
border. Moreover, we demonstrate that activation of both Rac and Cdc42, members 
of the family of small Rho GTPases, forms the link between the hypotonic 
stimulation and F-actin reorganization. Indeed, inhibition of the small GTPases 
RhoA, Rac, and Cdc42 (by Clostridium difficile toxin B) prevents the 
hypotonicity-induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, whereas 
inhibition of RhoA alone (by C. limosum C3 exoenzyme) does not preclude this 
rearrangement. Second, a direct activation and translocation toward the actin 
patches underneath the plasma membrane is observed for endogenous Rac and Cdc42 
(but not for RhoA) during cell swelling. Finally, transfection of Rat-1 
fibroblasts with constitutively active RhoA, dominant negative Rac, or dominant 
negative Cdc42 abolishes the swelling-induced actin reorganization. 
Interestingly, application of cRGD, a competitor peptide for 
fibronectin-integrin association, induces identical membrane protrusions and 
changes in the F-actin cytoskeleton that are also inhibited by C. difficile 
toxin B and dominant negative Rac or Cdc42. Moreover, cRGD also induces a 
redistribution of endogenous Rac and Cdc42 to the newly formed submembranous 
F-actin patches. We therefore conclude that hypotonicity and cRGD remodel the 
F-actin cytoskeleton in Rat-1 fibroblasts in a Rac/Cdc42-dependent way.
