Because cytoskeletal actin is regulated, in part, by Rho, and because Rho and 
caspases are involved in apoptosis, we sought to determine whether there was an 
association between RhoB and caspase-2. A RhoB-caspase-2 association was 
consistently demonstrated in neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes with Western 
Blotting, either after immunoprecipitation with RhoB followed by immunoblotting 
with caspase-2, or in reciprocal experiments after immuno precipitation with 
caspase-2 and immunoblotting with RhoB (n = 14). Although the RhoB-caspase-2 
complex was constitutively present, the link between RhoB and caspase-2 may be 
operative in apoptosis because the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor lovastatin 
increased the RhoB-caspase complex, especially in the nuclear fraction of the 
cell, with a peak occurrence 2 h after treatment. This association was 
unaffected by the caspase-2 inhibitor zVDVAD. Lovastatin produced apoptosis that 
was accompanied by an activation of caspase-2, as demonstrated by its 
immunohistochemistry and by the fact that the caspase-2 inhibitor zVDVAD reduced 
lovastatin-induced apoptosis. Lovastatin induced dramatic changes in cell 
morphology and a reduction in F-actin. Immunoblotting for actin suggests that 
lovastatin does not induce a degradation of the actin molecule, but rather 
affects filamentous F-actin. Caspase-2 inhibition with zVDVAD reduced 
lovastatin-induced alteration in cytoskeletal F-actin. The Rho inhibitor, 
Clostridium difficile toxin B, blunted the ability of lovastatin to induce 
apoptosis. In summary, these data show a previously unrecognized association 
between RhoB and caspase-2 in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions, which has 
ramifications for processes regulated by RhoB and caspase-2, including 
apoptosis.
