Visitation of hospitalized people by dogs is becoming commonplace, but little is 
known about the potential health risks of introducing dogs to healthcare 
settings. This cross-sectional study evaluated the prevalence of zoonotic agents 
in a group of 102 visitation dogs from a variety of sources across Ontario. 
Between May and July 2004, owners were interviewed by a standardized 
questionnaire while dogs underwent a standardized physical examination. One 
specimen of faeces, hair-coat brushings and one rectal, aural, nasal, oral and 
pharyngeal swab were collected from each dog and tested for 18 specific 
pathogens. All dogs were judged to be in good health. Zoonotic agents were 
isolated from 80 out of 102 (80%) dogs. The primary pathogen was Clostridium 
difficile, which was isolated from 58 (58%) faecal specimens. Seventy-one 
percent (41/58) of these isolates were toxigenic. Extended-spectrum 
beta-lactamase Escherichia coli was isolated from one (1%) dog, 
extended-spectrum cephalosporinase E. coli was isolated from three (3%) dogs, 
and organisms of the genus Salmonella were isolated from three (3%) dogs. 
Pasteurella multocida or Pasteurella canis was isolated from 29 (29%) oral 
swabs, and Malassezia pachydermatis was isolated from eight (8%) aural swabs. 
Giardia antigen was present in the faeces of seven (7%) dogs, while Toxocara 
canis and Ancylostoma caninum were detected in two (2%) dogs and one (1%) dog, 
respectively. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci, Campylobacter spp., Microsporum canis, group A streptococci, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Cryptosporidium spp. were not detected. Further 
information is needed before the full implications of these findings for 
infection control can be assessed properly.
