Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of nosocomial antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea, and recent outbreaks of strains with increased virulence underscore 
the importance of identifying novel approaches to treat and prevent relapse of 
Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD). CDAD pathology is induced by 
two exotoxins, toxin A and toxin B, which have been shown to be cytotoxic and, 
in the case of toxin A, enterotoxic. In this report we describe fully human 
monoclonal antibodies (HuMAbs) that neutralize these toxins and prevent disease 
in hamsters. Transgenic mice carrying human immunoglobulin genes were used to 
isolate HuMAbs that neutralize the cytotoxic effects of either toxin A or toxin 
B in cell-based in vitro neutralization assays. Three anti-toxin A HuMAbs (3H2, 
CDA1, and 1B11) could all inhibit the enterotoxicity of toxin A in mouse 
intestinal loops and the in vivo toxicity in a systemic mouse model. Four 
anti-toxin B HuMAbs (MDX-1388, 103-174, 1G10, and 2A11) could neutralize 
cytotoxicity in vitro, although systemic toxicity in the mouse could not be 
neutralized. Anti-toxin A HuMAb CDA1 and anti-toxin B HuMAb MDX-1388 were tested 
in the well-established hamster model of C. difficile disease. CDA1 alone 
resulted in a statistically significant reduction of mortality in hamsters; 
however, the combination treatment offered enhanced protection. Compared to 
controls, combination therapy reduced mortality from 100% to 45% (P<0.0001) in 
the primary disease hamster model and from 78% to 32% (P<0.0001) in the less 
stringent relapse model.
