The probiotic Saccharomyces boulardii is a non-pathogenic yeast that has been 
proven efficient in the prevention of antimicrobial-associated diarrhea and of 
Clostridium difficile associated colitis. We evaluated the influence of the 
administration of S. boulardii on the composition of the fecal microbiota in a 
human microbiota-associated mouse model. This evaluation was run before, during 
and after a 7-day oral treatment with amoxicillin clavulanic acid. Predominant 
groups of bacteria were quantified with fluorescence in situ hybridization 
combined with flow cytometry using group-specific 16S rRNA targeted 
oligonucleotide probes designed for the Eubacteria, 
Bacteroides-Porphyromonas-Prevotella, Clostridium coccoides-Eubacterium rectale, 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Clostridium histolyticum, 
Lactobacillus-Enterococcus and Enterobacteriaceae groups and Bifidobacterium 
species. S. boulardii did not quantitatively alter the total anaerobic 
microbiota nor the dominant bacterial groups. During the antibiotic treatment in 
the two groups of mice receiving the yeast or not, the level of 
Enterobacteriaceae and Bacteroides groups increased when the C. coccoides-E. 
rectale group decreased dramatically. After the antibiotic treatment was 
discontinued, the return to the initial level was reached more rapidly in the S. 
boulardii-treated mice than in the control mice (p<0.05) for the C. coccoides-E. 
rectale and Bacteroides-Porphyromonas-Prevotella groups. This quicker recovery 
of normal intestinal microbiota equilibrium after antibiotic therapy could be a 
mechanism for S. boulardii preventive effect on antibiotic-associated diarrhea 
in humans.
