Clostridium difficile is recognized as an important cause of nosocomial 
diarrhoea in humans especially in association with administration of 
antibiotics. In pigs, C. difficile can cause neonatal enteritis and can be 
isolated from faeces from both diseased and healthy animals. The presented 
prospective study describes how soon C. difficile can be isolated from newborn 
piglets after normal parturition and how C. difficile spreads within a pig farm. 
Six sows, their farrowing crates and their litters at one farm were sampled 
until C. difficile was found in all piglets. Within 48 h after birth, all 71 
piglets became positive for C. difficile (two piglets were already positive 
within 1h post partum), all sows became positive within 113 h after parturition 
and the farrowing crates were found intermittently positive. C. difficile could 
also be detected in air samples and in samples of teats of the sows. All 
isolates belonged to PCR ribotype 078. Twenty-one C. difficile ribotype 078 
isolates, found at the farm, were further analyzed by MLVA (multiple-locus 
variable-number tandem repeat analysis) and belonged to one clonal complex, 
except one isolate. To be sure that piglets were not born already infected with 
C. difficile ribotype 078, 38 caesarean derived piglets were sampled immediately 
after surgery. All piglets tested negative at delivery and stayed negative for 
C. difficile ribotype 078 during the 21 days in which they were kept in sterile 
incubators. This study shows that C. difficile ribotype 078 spreads easily 
between sows, piglets and the environment. Vertical transmission of C. difficile 
ribotype 078 was not found and is very unlikely to occur.
