Tigecycline is a broad-spectrum glycylcycline antibiotic with potent in vitro 
activity against Clostridium difficile. We used a mouse model to test the 
hypothesis that tigecycline has a low propensity to promote colonization and 
toxin production by C. difficile due to inhibitory activity in the colon. Mice 
(5 to 8 per group) received subcutaneous injections of tigecycline (low and high 
doses) alone or in combination with clindamycin for 6 days. Growth of and toxin 
production by 3 strains of C. difficile (tigecycline MICs ≤ 0.012 μg/ml) were 
measured in cecal contents collected 6 h or 3 days after the final antibiotic 
dose. Antibiotic concentrations were measured using a bioassay, and 
concentrations of total anaerobes and Bacteroides spp. were measured. The 
effects of tigecycline on rendering mice susceptible to colonization with and 
reducing the burden of C. difficile were also examined. In comparison to saline 
controls, clindamycin promoted the growth of C. difficile (P < 0.001) in cecal 
contents, whereas tigecycline did not. Tigecycline did not suppress total 
anaerobes or Bacteroides spp. in comparison to saline controls. Concurrent 
administration of tigecycline prevented clindamycin-induced promotion of C. 
difficile in cecal contents collected 6 h or 3 days (high dose only) after the 
final antibiotic dose. Tigecycline did not promote the establishment of 
colonization in mice, yet it did not reduce concentrations of C. difficile in 
animals with established colonization. In summary, tigecycline did not promote 
the growth of or toxin production by C. difficile, probably due to inhibitory 
activity against C. difficile and relative sparing of indigenous anaerobic 
microflora.
