In several neuronal cell types, the small GTPase Rac is essential for survival. 
We have shown previously that the Rho family GTPase inhibitor Clostridium 
difficile toxin B (ToxB) induces apoptosis in primary rat cerebellar granule 
neurons (CGNs) principally via inhibition of Rac GTPase function. In the present 
study, incubation with ToxB activated a proapoptotic Janus kinase (JAK)/signal 
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway, and a pan-JAK 
inhibitor protected CGNs from Rac inhibition. STAT1 expression was induced by 
ToxB; however, CGNs from STAT1 knock-out mice succumbed to ToxB-induced 
apoptosis as readily as wild-type CGNs. STAT3 displayed enhanced tyrosine 
phosphorylation following treatment with ToxB, and a reputed inhibitor of STAT3, 
cucurbitacin (JSI-124), reduced CGN apoptosis. Unexpectedly, JSI-124 failed to 
block STAT3 phosphorylation, and CGNs were not protected from ToxB by other 
known STAT3 inhibitors. In contrast, STAT5A tyrosine phosphorylation induced by 
ToxB was suppressed by JSI-124. In addition, roscovitine similarly inhibited 
STAT5A phosphorylation and protected CGNs from ToxB-induced apoptosis. 
Consistent with these results, adenoviral infection with a dominant negative 
STAT5 mutant, but not wild-type STAT5, significantly decreased ToxB-induced 
apoptosis of CGNs. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation with a STAT5 antibody 
revealed increased STAT5 binding to the promoter region of prosurvival Bcl-xL. 
STAT5 was recruited to the Bcl-xL promoter region in a ToxB-dependent manner, 
and this DNA binding preceded Bcl-xL down-regulation, suggesting transcriptional 
repression. These data indicate that a novel JAK/STAT5 proapoptotic pathway 
significantly contributes to neuronal apoptosis induced by the inhibition of Rac 
GTPase.
