Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a serious diarrheal disease that often 
develops following prior antibiotic usage. One of the major problems with 
current therapies (oral vancomycin and metronidazole) is the high rate of 
recurrence. Nitazoxanide (NTZ), an inhibitor of pyruvate:ferredoxin 
oxidoreductase (PFOR) in anaerobic bacteria, parasites, Helicobacter pylori, and 
Campylobacter jejuni, also shows clinical efficacy against CDI. From a library 
of ∼250 analogues of NTZ, we identified leads with increased potency for PFOR. 
MIC screens indicated in vitro activity in the 0.05- to 2-μg/ml range against C. 
difficile. To improve solubility, we replaced the 2-acetoxy group with 
propylamine, producing amixicile, a soluble (10 mg/ml), nontoxic (cell-based 
assay) lead that produced no adverse effects in mice by oral or intraperitoneal 
(i.p.) routes at 200 mg/kg of body weight/day. In initial efficacy testing in 
mice treated (20 mg/kg/day, 5 days each) 1 day after receiving a lethal inoculum 
of C. difficile, amixicile showed slightly less protection than did vancomycin 
by day 5. However, in an optimized CDI model, amixicile showed equivalence to 
vancomycin and fidaxomicin at day 5 and there was significantly greater survival 
produced by amixicile than by the other drugs on day 12. All three drugs were 
comparable by measures of weight loss/gain and severity of disease. Recurrence 
of CDI was common for mice treated with vancomycin or fidaxomicin but not for 
mice receiving amixicile or NTZ. These results suggest that gut repopulation 
with beneficial (non-PFOR) bacteria, considered essential for protection against 
CDI, rebounds much sooner with amixicile therapy than with vancomycin or 
fidaxomicin. If the mouse model is indeed predictive of human CDI disease, then 
amixicile, a novel PFOR inhibitor, appears to be a very promising new candidate 
for treatment of CDI.
