Pantothenate, commonly referred to as vitamin B(5), is an essential molecule in 
the metabolism of living organisms and forms the core of coenzyme A. Unlike 
humans, some bacteria and plants are capable of de novo biosynthesis of 
pantothenate, making this pathway a potential target for drug development. 
Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis Schu S4 is a zoonotic bacterial 
pathogen that is able to synthesize pantothenate but is lacking the known 
ketopantoate reductase (KPR) genes, panE and ilvC, found in the canonical 
Escherichia coli pathway. Described herein is a gene encoding a novel KPR, for 
which we propose the name panG (FTT1388), which is conserved in all sequenced 
Francisella species and is the sole KPR in Schu S4. Homologs of this KPR are 
present in other pathogenic bacteria such as Enterococcus faecalis, Coxiella 
burnetii, and Clostridium difficile. Both the homologous gene from E. faecalis 
V583 (EF1861) and E. coli panE functionally complemented Francisella novicida 
lacking any KPR. Furthermore, panG from F. novicida can complement an E. coli 
KPR double mutant. A Schu S4 ΔpanG strain is a pantothenate auxotroph and was 
genetically and chemically complemented with panG in trans or with the addition 
of pantolactone. There was no virulence defect in the Schu S4 ΔpanG strain 
compared to the wild type in a mouse model of pneumonic tularemia. In summary, 
we characterized the pantothenate pathway in Francisella novicida and F. 
tularensis and identified an unknown and previously uncharacterized KPR that can 
convert 2-dehydropantoate to pantoate, PanG.
