Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) results in toxin-induced epithelial injury 
and marked intestinal inflammation. Fecal markers of intestinal inflammation 
correlate with CDI disease severity, but regulation of the inflammatory response 
is poorly understood. Previous studies demonstrated that C. difficile toxin TcdA 
activates p38 kinase in tissue culture cells and mouse ilium, resulting in 
interleukin-8 (IL-8) release. Here, we investigated the role of phosphorylated 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-activated protein kinase (MK2 kinase, 
pMK2), a key mediator of p38-dependent inflammation, in CDI. Exposure of 
cultured intestinal epithelial cells to the C. difficile toxins TcdA and TcdB 
resulted in p38-dependent MK2 activation. Toxin-induced IL-8 and GROÎ± release 
required MK2 activity. We found that p38 and MK2 are activated in response to 
other actin-disrupting agents, suggesting that toxin-induced cytoskeleton 
disruption is the trigger for kinase-dependent cytokine response. Phosphorylated 
MK2 was detected in the intestines of C. difficile-infected hamsters and mice, 
demonstrating for the first time that the pathway is activated in infected 
animals. Furthermore, we found that elevated pMK2 correlated with the presence 
of toxigenic C. difficile among 100 patient stool samples submitted for C. 
difficile testing. In conclusion, we find that MK2 kinase is activated by TcdA 
and TcdB and regulates the expression of proinflammatory cytokines. Activation 
of p38-MK2 in infected animals and humans suggests that this pathway is a key 
driver of intestinal inflammation in patients with CDI.
