Clostridium difficile is a frequent cause of severe, recurrent post-antibiotic 
diarrhoea and pseudomembranous colitis. The surface layer (S-layer) is the 
predominant outer surface component of C. difficile which is involved in 
pathogen-host interactions critical to pathogenesis. In this study, we 
characterized the S-layer protein A (SlpA) of animal and human strains belonging 
to different PCR-ribotypes (PR) and compared the in vitro adherence and in vivo 
colonization properties of strains showing different SlpA variants. Since each 
SlpA variant has been recently associated with an S-layer cassette, we were able 
to deduce the cassette for each of our strains. In this study, an identity of 
99-100 % was found among the SlpA of isolates belonging to PR 012, 014/020, 045 
and 078. One exception was the SlpA of a poultry isolate, PR 014/020, which 
showed 99 % identity with that of strain 0160, another PR 014/020 which contains 
an S-layer cassette 6. Interestingly, this cassette has also been found in a PR 
018 strain, an emerging virulent type currently predominant in Italy. Five other 
SlpA variants (v014/020a-e) were identified in strains PR 014/020. In vitro 
adherence assays and in vivo colonization experiments were performed on five PR 
014/020 strains: human 1064 (v014/020e), human 4684/08 (v014/020b), human IT1106 
(v078a), poultry P30 (v014/020d) and poultry PB90 (v014/020b) strains. Adhesion 
assays indicate that C. difficile strains vary in their capacity to adhere to 
cells in culture and that adhesion seems to be independent of the SlpA variant. 
Colonization properties were assessed in vivo using a dixenic mouse model of 
colonization. The kinetics of faecal shedding and caecal colonization were 
similar when human 4684/08 (v014/020b) strain was compared with human 1064 
(v014/020e) and poultry PB90 (v014/020b) strain. In contrast, poultry P30 
(v014/020d) strain outcompeted both human 4684/08 (v014/020b) and IT1106 (v078a) 
strains and its adherence to caeca at day 7 was significantly higher. The 
peculiar characteristics of C. difficile P30 seem to advantage it in colonizing 
the intestinal mice niche, increasing its ability to compete and adapt. The 
results obtained underline the need of an increased attention to the genetic 
evolution of C. difficile to prevent and limit the consequences of the emergence 
of increasingly virulent strains.
