Clostridium difficile is a spore-forming bacillus that produces toxin-mediated 
enteric disease. C. difficile expresses two major virulence factors, toxin A 
(TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB). Human and animal studies demonstrate a clear 
association between humoral immunity to these toxins and protection against C. 
difficile infection (CDI). The receptor binding-domains (RBDs) of TcdA and TcdB 
are known to be immunogenic. Here, we tested the immunoadjuvant properties of 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium flagellin (FliC) subunit D1 as an innate 
immune agonist expressed as a recombinant fusion vaccine targeting the RBDs of 
TcdA and TcdB in mice. Intraperitoneally immunized mice developed prominent 
anti-TcdA and anti-TcdB immunoglobulin G in serum. The protective efficacy of 
the recombinant vaccines, with or without an adjuvant, was tested in a mouse 
model of CDI that closely represents the human disease. Following 
intraperitoneal immunization equivalent to two doses of toxoid A and toxoid B 
vaccine adjuvanted with alum and oral challenge with C. difficile VPI 10463, 
C57BL/6 mice were able to mount a protective immune response that prevented 
diarrhea and death compared to mice immunzed with alum alone. These results are 
significantly different from those for control mice (P < 0.001). These results 
provide evidence that a recombinant protein-based vaccine targeting the RBDs of 
the C. difficile toxins adjuvanted with S. Typhimurium flagellin can induce 
rapid, high-level protection in a mouse model of CDI when challenged with the 
homologous strain from which the vaccine antigens were derived and warrant 
further preclinical testing against clinically relevant C. difficile strains in 
the mouse and hamster models of CDI.
