Clostridium difficile is the cause of emerging nosocomial infections that result 
in abundant morbidity and mortality worldwide. Thus, the development of a 
vaccine to kill the bacteria to prevent this disease is highly desirable. 
Several recently identified bacterial surface glycans, such as PS-I and PS-II, 
are promising vaccine candidates to preclude C. difficile infection. To 
circumvent difficulties with the generation of natural PS-I due to its low 
expression levels in bacterial cultures, improved chemical synthesis protocols 
for the pentasaccharide repeating unit of PS-I and oligosaccharide substructures 
were utilized to produce large quantities of well-defined PS-I related glycans. 
The analysis of stool and serum samples obtained from C. difficile patients 
using glycan microarrays of synthetic oligosaccharide epitopes revealed humoral 
immune responses to the PS-I related glycan epitopes. Two different vaccine 
candidates were evaluated in the mouse model. A synthetic PS-I repeating unit 
CRM197 conjugate was immunogenic in mice and induced immunoglobulin class 
switching as well as affinity maturation. Microarray screening employing PS-I 
repeating unit substructures revealed the disaccharide Rha-(1→3)-Glc as a 
minimal epitope. A CRM197-Rha-(1→3)-Glc disaccharide conjugate was able to 
elicit antibodies recognizing the C. difficile PS-I pentasaccharide. We herein 
demonstrate that glycan microarrays exposing defined oligosaccharide epitopes 
help to determine the minimal immunogenic epitopes of complex oligosaccharide 
antigens. The synthetic PS-I pentasaccharide repeating unit as well as the 
Rha-(1→3)-Glc disaccharide are promising novel vaccine candidates against C. 
difficile that are currently in preclinical evaluation.
