Clostridium difficile is currently the major cause of nosocomial intestinal 
diseases associated with antibiotic therapy in adults. In order to improve our 
knowledge of C. difficile-host interactions, we analyzed the genome-wide 
temporal expression of C. difficile 630 genes during the first 38 h of mouse 
colonization to identify genes whose expression is modulated in vivo, suggesting 
that they may play a role in facilitating the colonization process. In the ceca 
of the C. difficile-monoassociated mice, 549 genes of the C. difficile genome 
were differentially expressed compared to their expression during in vitro 
growth, and they were distributed in several functional categories. Overall, our 
results emphasize the roles of genes involved in host adaptation. Colonization 
results in a metabolic shift, with genes responsible for the fermentation as 
well as several other metabolic pathways being regulated inversely to those 
involved in carbon metabolism. In addition, several genes involved in stress 
responses, such as ferrous iron uptake or the response to oxidative stress, were 
regulated in vivo. Interestingly, many genes encoding conserved hypothetical 
proteins (CHP) were highly and specifically upregulated in vivo. Moreover, genes 
for all stages of sporulation were quickly induced in vivo, highlighting the 
observation that sporulation is central to the persistence of C. difficile in 
the gut and to its ability to spread in the environment. Finally, we inactivated 
two genes that were differentially expressed in vivo and evaluated the relative 
colonization fitness of the wild-type and mutant strains in coinfection 
experiments. We identified a CHP as a putative colonization factor, supporting 
the suggestion that the in vivo transcriptomic approach can unravel new C. 
difficile virulence genes.
