PURPOSE: Rho GTPases play a central role in actin-based cytoskeleton 
reorganization and regulate multiple signaling pathways that control gene 
transcription, cell survival, and proliferation. We investigated the effect of 
Rho GTPases on cell cycle regulation and progenitor genes expression on mouse 
ciliary epithelium (CE), a potential source of progenitor/stem cells in the 
adult retina.
METHODS: Rho GTPases were activated by intraocular injection of lysophosphatidic 
acid and inactivated by Clostridium difficile Toxin A (general Rho GTPase 
inhibitor), NSC23766 (Rac1 activation inhibitor), or Y27632 (Rho-associated 
protein kinase [ROCK] inhibitor). Thereafter, we assayed for RhoA, RhoB, and 
Rac1 protein localization in CE cells. Proliferation was examined by the 
expression levels of cell cycle regulators p27(kip), p16(INK4a), and Ki67 and 
the effects on progenitors by determining the changes in Pax6 and Chx10 
progenitor markers expression.
RESULTS: All GTPases investigated were expressed in mouse CE cells. Activation 
increased the coexpression of Pax6 and Chx10, but had no significant effect on 
the proliferation of CE cells. In contrast, Rho GTPases inactivation increased 
cell proliferation and potentiated the proliferative effect of growth factors. 
Specific inactivation of Rac1 or ROCK increased the levels of Ki67 and decreased 
the expression of the cell cycle inhibitors p27(kip) and p16(INK4a).
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports that Rho GTPase modulation (activation and 
inactivation) controls the expression of retinal progenitor genes and 
proliferation, respectively, in the adult ciliary epithelial progenitor/stem 
cells of rodent eyes. The modulation of these two different mechanisms 
(proliferation and reprogramming) may provide a potential new approach in 
retinal repair.
