Clostridium difficile infection is the most common cause of severe cases of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD) and is a significant health burden. Recent 
increases in the rate of C. difficile infection have paralleled the emergence of 
a specific phylogenetic clade of C. difficile strains (ribotype 027; North 
American pulsed-field electrophoresis 1 [NAP1]; restriction endonuclease 
analysis [REA] group BI). Initial reports indicated that ribotype 027 strains 
were associated with increased morbidity and mortality and might be 
hypervirulent. Although subsequent work has raised some doubt as to whether 
ribotype 027 strains are hypervirulent, the strains are considered epidemic 
isolates that have caused severe outbreaks across the globe. We hypothesized 
that one factor that could lead to the increased prevalence of ribotype 027 
strains would be if these strains had increased competitive fitness compared to 
strains of other ribotypes. We developed a moderate-throughput in vitro model of 
C. difficile infection and used it to test competition between four ribotype 027 
clinical isolates and clinical isolates of four other ribotypes (001, 002, 014, 
and 053). We found that ribotype 027 strains outcompeted the strains of other 
ribotypes. A similar competitive advantage was observed when two ribotype pairs 
were competed in a mouse model of C. difficile infection. Based upon these 
results, we conclude that one possible mechanism through which ribotype 027 
strains have caused outbreaks worldwide is their increased ability to compete in 
the presence of a complex microbiota.
