The most striking effect of Clostridium difficile infection is its degrading of 
the intestinal barrier. The aim of this study is to establish whether the 
cellular or paracellular constituent of the barrier is the initial target of the 
toxins produced by C difficile. Accordingly, the caecal epithelium of C3H/He 
mice was challenged under three experimental conditions with the C difficile 
strain VPI 10463: (1) by in vivo inoculation of axenic mice, (2) by adding the 
toxins to ligated caeca in vivo, and (3) by adding them to the mucosal side of 
isolated caeca in Ussing chambers. Under all three conditions, the epithelial 
barrier was tested in caeca mounted in these chambers. The transepithelial 
potential difference (PD), electrical conductance (G), and intact and degraded 
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) fluxes were used as indexes of permeability. 
Results were as follows: (1) In axenic mice, C difficile caused severe 
infection, produced toxins A and B, reduced PD, and enhanced G and intact HRP 
fluxes without changing degraded HRP fluxes, (2) four hours after the toxins 
were added to ligated caeca in vivo, PD was relatively unaltered, but G, and 
intact and degraded HRP fluxes increased, and (3) when toxins were added to 
caeca during two hours in the Ussing chambers, the only modification observed 
was an increase in degraded-HRP fluxes. These results indicate that the C 
difficile toxins gradually cause intestinal lesions. After an apparent 
resistance, they stimulate the endocytotic process and then increase 
paracellular permeability and finally cause loss of cell viability.
