Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) causes nosocomial antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea and colitis in the developed world. Two potent cytotoxins, toxin A 
(TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB) are the virulence factors of this disease and can be a 
good vaccine candidate against CDI. In the present study, we genetically 
engineered Lactococcus lactis to express the nontoxic, recombinant fragments 
derived from TcdA and TcdB C-terminal receptor binding domains (Tcd-AC and 
Tcd-BC) as an oral vaccine candidate. The immunogenicity of the genetically 
engineered L. lactis oral vaccine delivery system (animal groups LAC and LBC or 
the combination of both, LACBC) was compared with the recombinant TcdA and TcdB 
C-terminal receptor binding domain proteins (animal groups PAC and PBC or the 
combination of both, PACBC), which were expressed and purified from E. coli. 
After the C. difficile challenge, the control groups received PBS or engineered 
L. lactis with empty vector, showed severe diarrhea symptoms and died within 2-3 
days. However, both the oral vaccine and recombinant protein vaccine groups had 
significantly lower mortalities, body weight decreases and histopathologic 
lesions than the control sham-vaccine groups (p<0.05) except group LBC which 
only had a 31% survival rate after the challenge. The data of post infection 
survival showed that an average of 86% of animals survived in groups PAC and 
PACBC, 75% of animals survived in group LACBC, and 65% of animals survived in 
group LAC. All of the vaccinated animals produced higher titers of both IgG and 
IgA than the control groups (p<0.05), and the antibodies were able to neutralize 
the cytopathic effect of toxins in vitro. The results of this study indicate 
that there is a potential to use L. lactis as a delivery system to develop a 
cost effective oral vaccine against CDI.
