BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile disease is the leading antibiotic-associated 
cause of diarrhea and nosocomial acquired infection in the western world. The 
per annum burden in the USA alone amounts to 250,000 cases with 14,000 ascribed 
deaths and medical costs in excess of a billion dollars. Novel models for the 
study of C. difficile infection are therefore pertinent.
RESULTS: Germ free C57BL/6 mice gavaged with a healthy human fecal microbiota 
maintained a stable "humanized" microbiota over multiple generations when housed 
under specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions. As with mice containing a 
conventional microbiota, treatment with a five-antibiotic cocktail followed by a 
single dose of clindamycin renders the animals susceptible to C. difficile 
infection (CDI). Interestingly, after recovery from the initial CDI infection, a 
single intraperitoneal injection of clindamycin is sufficient to induce CDI 
relapse. Relapse of CDI can be induced up to 35 days postinfection after 
recovery from the initial infection, and multiple episodes of relapse can be 
induced.
CONCLUSIONS: This model enables the study of recurrent C. difficile disease in a 
host containing a human-derived microbiota. Probiotic treatments using 
human-derived microbes, either prophylactic or curative, can be tested within 
the model. The identification and testing of human-derived microbial communities 
within a humanized microbiota mouse model may enable a higher rate of successful 
transfer of bacteria-based treatments from the lab to human patients due to the 
microbes involved initiating from, and being adapted to, the human GI tract.
