Nosocomial acquisition of Clostridium difficile is well documented, yet recent 
studies have highlighted the importance of community acquired infections and 
identified community associated reservoirs for this pathogen. Multiple studies 
have implicated companion pets and farm animals as possible sources of community 
acquired C. difficile infections in humans. To explore the potential role of pet 
dogs in human C. difficile infections we systematically collected canine fecal 
samples (n = 197) in Flagstaff, AZ. Additionally, nineteen fecal samples were 
collected at a local veterinary clinic from diarrheic dogs. We used these 
combined samples to investigate important questions regarding C. difficile 
colonization in pet canines: 1) What is the prevalence and diversity of C. 
difficile in this companion pet population, and 2) Do C. difficile isolates 
collected from canines genetically overlap with isolates that cause disease in 
humans? We used a two-step sequence typing approach, including multilocus 
sequence typing to determine the overall genetic diversity of C. difficile 
present in Flagstaff canines, and whole-genome sequencing to assess the 
fine-scale diversity patterns within identical multilocus sequence types from 
isolates obtained within and among multiple canine hosts. We detected C. 
difficile in 17% of the canine fecal samples with 10% containing toxigenic 
strains that are known to cause human disease. Sequencing analyses revealed 
similar genotypes in dogs and humans. These findings suggest that companion pets 
are a potential source of community acquired C. difficile infections in humans.
