Mechanisms regulating the appearance of sIgE+ B lymphocytes appear to be lacking 
in adult germfree (GF) rats in that their Peyer's patches (PP) contain high 
numbers of cells with sIgE (approximately 15% of total cells), one-half of which 
simultaneously express sIgA, whereas sIgE+ cells are absent from PP of 
conventional rats (less than 1%). GF rat PP also contain elevated numbers of 
sIgA+ cells and decreased numbers of sIgM+ cells, with elevated numbers of 
sThy-1+ RT 7.1+ Ig- T cells, and reduced numbers of sThy-1- RT 7.1+ Ig- T cells. 
The cellular composition of PP of GF rats was converted to that resembling a 
conventional rat within 18 h after either 1) use of standard (unautoclaved) 
food; 2) feeding with certain bacteria (Clostridium difficile, Corynebacterium 
pseudodiphtheriticum, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Klebsiella pneumoniae), in 
either live or heat-killed, but not autoclaved form; or with certain bacterial 
cell wall components: murein (peptidoglycan), and its synthetic derivatives, 
muramyltripeptide phosphatidylethanolamine and desmethyl-muramyldipeptide, but 
not with LPS, core lipid A or lipoprotein; there was no effect if any bacterial 
cell wall component was injected i.v.; or 3) thymectomy. Each procedure resulted 
in elimination of sIgE+ B cells and normalization of the other surface isotypes, 
and loss of sThy-1+ RT 7.1+ Ig- T cells and normalization of sThy-1- RT 7.1+ Ig- 
T cells. Irrespective of treatment, no sIgE+ cells were detected in bone marrow, 
thymus, other lymphoid organs or blood, excluding the possibility that the 
elimination of these cells from PP was associated with their redistribution to 
other sites. Thus, exposure to gut flora and bacterial peptidoglycan components 
may have resulted in IgE isotype switching, either directly or through the 
mediation of accessory and/or sThy-1+ RT 7.1+ regulatory T cells. The sites in 
which sIgE+ B cells are down-regulated appear to be PP.
