BACKGROUND: The glycylcycline antibiotic tigecycline may have a relatively low 
propensity to promote Clostridium difficile infection in part because it causes 
less disruption of the indigenous intestinal microbiota than other 
broad-spectrum antibiotics. We used a mouse model to compare the effects of 
tigecycline versus other commonly used antibiotics on colonization resistance to 
C. difficile and on the metabolic functions of the intestinal microbiota.
METHODS: To assess in vivo colonization resistance to C. difficile, mice were 
challenged with oral C. difficile spores 1, 7, or 12 days after completion of 3 
days of treatment with subcutaneous saline, tigecycline, ceftriaxone, 
piperacillin-tazobactam, or linezolid. Levels of bacterial metabolites in fecal 
specimens of mice treated with the same antibiotics were analyzed using 
non-targeted metabolic profiling by gas chromatograph (GC)/mass spectrometry 
(MS) and ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem MS (UPLC-MS/MS).
RESULTS: All of the antibiotics disrupted colonization resistance to C. 
difficile when challenge occurred 2 days after treatment. Only 
piperacillin/tazobactam mice had disturbed colonization resistance at 7 days 
after treatment. All of the antibiotics altered fecal metabolites in comparison 
to controls, but tigecycline caused significantly less alteration than the other 
antibiotics, including less suppression of multiple amino acids, bile acids, and 
lipid metabolites.
CONCLUSIONS: Tigecycline, linezolid, and ceftriaxone caused transient disruption 
of colonization resistance to C. difficile, whereas piperacillin/tazobactam 
caused disruption that persisted for 7 days post-treatment. Tigecycline caused 
less profound alteration of fecal bacterial metabolites than the other 
antibiotics, suggesting that the relatively short period of disruption of 
colonization resistance might be related in part to reduced alteration of the 
metabolic functions of the microbiota.
