PROBLEM: Albert Einstein defines insanity as doing the same thing over again but 
expecting different results. Although the United States claims to reduce 
antibiotic abuse, practice strict isolation, and clean meticulously, the burden 
of Clostridium difficile outpaces goals. Unless innovative approaches are tried, 
we risk culling elderly, immunosuppressed, and otherwise debilitated 
populations. Emergency departments are a primary access point for patients who 
are unable to wait for primary care. As a result, many patients with diarrhea 
are seen in emergency departments.
METHODS: This article describes one hospital system's quality improvement trial 
of disposable commode pails (DCPs) for high-acuity patients in 3 of 5 
institutions. The rationale was to prevent staff from touching surfaces heavily 
contaminated with C difficile. Staff members were not to wash or reuse commode 
buckets between patients. Instead, DCPs were substituted, and only the commode 
chairs were wiped. For quantitative date, C difficile infections (CDIs) were 
compared across hospitals. Staff members were surveyed for qualitative data.
RESULTS: According to Survey Monkey, the rate of employee satisfaction with the 
new process was 95%. Fewer sewage backups resulted because nonbiodegradable 
wipes were disposed inside DCPs rather than in toilets or hoppers. 
Implementation and product costs were justified through labor savings and a 
reduced incidence of CDIs. CDI improvements were noted in system hospital 
emergency departments that used DCPs. Moreover, in one hospital that used DCPs 
in all nursing units for 1 year, CDI rates were reduced by 32%.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Third-party hospital laboratories generated all CDI 
data, which reduced bias. However, laboratories were unable to stratify CDIs as 
inpatient and outpatient in origin. More research is recommended with larger ED 
patient sample sizes.

Copyright Â© 2017 Emergency Nurses Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.
