This study investigated the effect of carvacrol (CR), a phytophenolic compound 
on antibiotic-associated gut dysbiosis and C. difficile infection in a mouse 
model. Five to six-week-old C57BL/6 mice were randomly divided into seven 
treatment groups (challenge and control) of eight mice each. Mice were fed with 
irradiated feed supplemented with CR (0, 0.05, and 0.1%); the challenge groups 
were made susceptible to C. difficile by orally administering an antibiotic 
cocktail in water and an intra-peritoneal injection of clindamycin. Both 
challenge and control groups were infected with 105CFU/ml of hypervirulent C. 
difficile (ATCC 1870) spores or PBS, and observed for clinical signs for 10 
days. Respective control groups for CR, antibiotics, and their combination were 
included for investigating their effect on mouse enteric microflora. Mouse body 
weight and clinical and diarrhea scores were recorded daily post infection. 
Fecal samples were collected for microbiome analysis using rRNA sequencing in 
MiSeq platform. Carvacrol supplementation significantly reduced the incidence of 
diarrhea and improved the clinical and diarrhea scores in mice (p < 0.05). 
Microbiome analysis revealed a significant increase in Proteobacteria and 
reduction in the abundance of protective bacterial flora in antibiotic-treated 
and C. difficile-infected mice compared to controls (p < 0.05). However, CR 
supplementation positively altered the microbiome composition, as revealed by an 
increased abundance of beneficial bacteria, including Firmicutes, and 
significantly reduced the proportion of detrimental flora such as 
Proteobacteria, without significantly affecting the gut microbiome diversity 
compared to control. Results suggest that CR could potentially be used to 
control gut dysbiosis and reduce C. difficile infection.
