Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic spore-forming bacillus that usually causes 
gastrointestinal disorders in man and other animal species. Most of the strains 
isolated from animals are toxigenic being the virulent ribotype (RT) 078 
predominant in several animal species. Although C. difficile is pathogenic to 
both humans and animals, there is no direct evidence of zoonosis. Deep genome 
sequencing provides sufficient resolution to analyse which strains found in 
animals might be related to human pathogens. So far, there are only a few fully 
sequenced genomes of C. difficile strains isolated from domestic and wild 
animals. Using Illumina technology, we have sequenced the genome of three 
isolates; a strain isolated from the vagina of a sow (5754), one from rat 
(Rattus spp) intestinal content (RC10) and a third one isolated from 
environmental rat faeces (RF17). Both, rat and rat faeces were sampled in 
fattening pig farms. Our study reveals a close genetic relationship of two of 
these isolates with the virulent strain M120 (RT078) isolated from a human 
patient. The analysis of the sequences has revealed the presence of antibiotic 
resistance genes, mobile elements, including the transposon linked with 
virulence Tn6164, and the similarity of virulence factors between these isolates 
and human strains. This is the first study focused on the sequencing of 
C. difficile genomes obtained from wild animals like rats, which can be 
considered as potential reservoirs for humans and other animal species. This 
study can help to understand the genome composition and epidemiology of this 
bacterium species.
