Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major healthcare-associated disease 
with high recurrence rates. Host colonization is critical for the infectious 
process, both in first episodes and in recurrent disease, with biofilm formation 
playing a key role. The ability of C. difficile to form a biofilm on abiotic 
surfaces is established, but has not yet been confirmed in the intestinal tract. 
Here, four different isolates of C. difficile, which are in vitro biofilm 
producers, were studied for their ability to colonize germ-free mice. The level 
of colonization achieved was similar for all isolates in the different parts of 
the murine gastrointestinal tract, but pathogen burden was higher in the cecum 
and colon. Confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed that C. difficile 
bacteria were distributed heterogeneously over the intestinal tissue, without 
contact with epithelial cells. The R20291 strain, which belongs to the Ribotype 
027 lineage, displayed a unique behavior compared to the other strains by 
forming numerous aggregates. By immunochemistry analyses, we showed that 
bacteria were localized inside and outside the mucus layer, irrespective of the 
strains tested. Most bacteria were entrapped in 3-D structures overlaying the 
mucus layer. For the R20291 strain, the cell-wall associated polysaccharide 
PS-II was detected in large amounts in the 3-D structure. As this component has 
been detected in the extrapolymeric matrix of in vitro C. difficile biofilms, 
our data suggest strongly that at least the R20291 strain is organized in the 
mono-associated mouse model in glycan-rich biofilm architecture, which 
sustainably maintains bacteria outside the mucus layer.
