The immunogenicity of bacterial flagellin has been reported in different 
studies. By its close interaction with the immune system, the flagellin 
represents an interesting adjuvant and vaccine candidate. Salmonella Typhimurium 
flagellin has already been tested as adjuvant to stimulate mucosal immunity. 
Here, we assessed the ability of Clostridium difficile flagellin FliC to act as 
a mucosal adjuvant, first combined with ovalbumin as antigen and second with a 
C. difficile surface protein, the precursor of the S-layer proteins SlpA. Using 
ovalbumin as antigen, we compared the gut mucosal adjuvanticity of FliC to 
Salmonella Typhimurium flagellin and cholera toxin. Two routes of immunization 
were tested in a mouse model: intra-rectal and intra-peritoneal, following 
which, gut mucosal and systemic antibody responses against ovalbumin 
(Immunoglobulins G and Immunoglobulins A) were analyzed by Enzyme-Linked Immuno 
Assay in intestinal contents and in sera. In addition, ovalbumin-specific 
immunoglobulin producing cells were detected in the intestinal lamina propria by 
Enzyme-Linked Immunospot. Results showed that FliC as adjuvant for immunization 
targeting ovalbumin was able to stimulate a gut mucosal and systemic antibody 
response independently of the immunization route. In order to develop a mucosal 
vaccine to prevent C. difficile intestinal colonization, we assessed in a mouse 
model the efficacy of FliC as adjuvant compared with cholera toxin 
co-administrated with the C. difficile S-layer precursor SlpA as antigen. After 
challenge, a significant decrease of C. difficile intestinal colonization was 
observed in immunized groups compared to the control group. Our results showed 
that C. difficile FliC could be used as adjuvant in mucosal vaccination strategy 
against C. difficile infections.
