Spray-dried porcine plasma (SDPP) has been considered as an alternative for 
in-feed antibiotics to improve pig growth performance; however, the effect of 
SDPP on gut microbiota is unknown. The objective of this study was to evaluate 
effects of feeding SDPP on fecal microbial communities of nursery pigs. 
Ninety-six weaned pigs were assigned to 16 pens, which were allotted to two 
dietary treatments, including the control or the control + SDPP (5% and 2.5% 
SDPP inclusion in phase 1 and 2, respectively) diet. Fecal samples were 
collected at d 0, 7, 14, 21, and 28. Multiplex sequencing of V3 region of the 
16S rRNA gene was used to characterize the bacterial community structure of 
fecal samples. Pearson's correlation tests were performed in Calypso to identify 
bacterial taxa that were either positively or negatively associated with overall 
growth performance. Feeding SDPP altered microbial structure at family, genus, 
and operational taxonomic unit (OTU) classifications; however, fecal microbes 
shifted with time. At the family level, Clostridiaceae increased (P < 0.001) on 
d 14, but decreased (P < 0.05) on d 28 in SDPP-fed pigs compared with control 
pigs. Decreased Veillonellaceae (P < 0.05; d 14) and Lachnospiraceae (P = 0.001; 
overall) were observed in SDPP-fed pigs compared with control pigs. Feeding SDPP 
increased lactic acid-producing bacteria (Lactobacillus delbrueckii, d 7) and 
cellulolytic bacteria (Ruminococcus albus, d 7; Clostridium thermocellum, d 7 
and 14; and Clostridium saccharoperbutylacetonicum/beijerinckii, d 14; and 
Megasphaera elsdenii, d 21). On d 28, feeding SDPP decreased (P < 0.05) 
Clostridium difficile compared with control pigs. In conclusion, feeding SDPP 
altered fecal microbial communities in nursery pigs. The results of this study 
may provide information to help explain the positive effects associated with 
feeding SDPP on nutrient digestibility and gut health of nursery pigs.
