Clostridium difficile (C. difficile), an enterobacteria, flourishes and produces 
potent toxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), after the disruption of the 
normal colonic microbiota by antibiotic therapy. C. difficile infection (CDI) 
may induce life-threatening complications such as fulminant colitis through 
damage of the intestinal wall by the toxins, therefore the prevention of CDI 
recurrence is the most important in CDI treatment. Bezlotoxumab is a human 
monoclonal antibody that neutralizes the activity of TcdB directly. The antibody 
inhibited cytotoxicity by TcdB derived from various ribotypes of C. difficile at 
a concentration (EC50) of 1/150 or less of the serum concentration (Cmax: 
169 μg/mL) in CDI patients at the clinical dose. Moreover the anti-cytotoxicity 
effects of the antibody were also observed against 81 clinically isolated C. 
difficile strains (incl. 018 [smz] and 369 [trf]: Japanese prevalent ribotypes; 
027: hypervirulent ribotype) obtained in Japan and western countries. The 
antibody prolonged survival time of hamster and rat CDI models in a 
dose-dependent manner. In clinical phase III studies (MODIFY I and II), the 
recurrence rate of CDI up to 12 weeks after administration of the bezlotoxumab 
group was significantly lower (P<0.0001) than the placebo group. Bezlotoxumab is 
the world's first drug with an indication for reduce recurrence of CDI. In 
Japan, bezlotoxumab was approved for marketing in September, and launched in 
December in 2017. Bezlotoxumab is effective for broad ribotypes of C. difficile, 
therefore it expects to contribute to CDI treatment through the reduce 
recurrence of the CDI.
