Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major cause of infectious diarrhea 
among hospitalized patients. Probiotics could be instrumental in restoring the 
intestinal dysbiosis caused by CDI. Here, we examined the protective effect of 
Pediococcus pentosaceus LI05 in a mouse CDI model. C57BL/6 mice were 
administrated P. pentosaceus LI05 (LI05 group) or sterile anaerobic PBS (CDI 
group) everyday for 14 days. Mice were exposed to antibiotics cocktail for 5 
days; then challenged with C. difficile strain VPI10463. Mice were monitored 
daily for survival and weight loss. Colonic tissue and serum samples were 
assessed for intestinal histopathology, intestinal barrier function and systemic 
inflammation. The oral administration of P. pentosaceus LI05 improved the 
survival rate and alleviated the histopathological impact of C. difficile. 
Compared to the CDI group, the levels of inflammatory mediators in the colon as 
well as inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in serum were substantially 
attenuated in the LI05 group. P. pentosaceus LI05 alleviated the CDI-induced of 
disruption of ZO-1, occludin and claudin-1. Additionally, fecal microbiome 
analysis showed an enrichment in the abundance of the Porphyromonadaceae and 
Rikenellaceae, while, the relative abundance of Enterobacteriaceae were 
decreased. Our results demonstrated that the preventive effect of P. pentosaceus 
LI05 against CDI was mediated via improving tight junction proteins and 
down-regulating the inflammatory response. Therefore, P. pentosaceus LI05 could 
be a promising probiotic in CDI.
