The expression of the Clostridium difficile binary toxin CDT is generally 
observed in the RT027 (ST1) and RT078 (ST11) C. difficile isolates, which are 
associated with severe C. difficile infection (CDI). However, we recently 
reported that the non-RT027 and non-RT078 C. difficile strain LC693 (TcdA+TcdB+ 
CDT+, ST201) caused severe diarrhea in a patient in Xiangya Hospital in China. 
C.difficile LC693 is a member of Clade 3, and in this study, we identified LC693 
as RT871 and compared its virulence and pathogenicity to those of C.difficile 
R20291 (TcdA+TcdB+CDT+, ST1/RT027), UK6 (TcdA+TcdB+CDT+, ST35/RT027), CD630 
(TcdA+TcdB+CDT-, ST54, RT012), and 1379 (TcdA+TcdB+CDT-, ST54/RT012), with 
strain 1379 being an epidemic C.difficile isolate from the same hospital. LC693 
displayed a higher sporulation rate than R20291, CD630 or strain 1379. LC693 was 
comparable to R20291 with respect to spore germination, motility, and biofilm 
formation, but showed a faster germination rate, higher motility and a higher 
biofilm formation capability compared to CD630 and strain 1379. The adherence of 
spores to human gut epithelial cells was similar for all strains.The total toxin 
release of LC693 was lower than that of R20291, but higher than that of CD630 
and strain 1379. Finally, in a mouse model of CDI, LC693 was capable of causing 
moderate to severe disease. Our findings demonstrate the pathogenicity of 
non-RT027 and non-RT078 binary toxin-positive C. difficile strains. Furthermore, 
our data indicate that LC693 may be more virulent than strain 1379, an epidemic 
strain from the same hospital, and provide the first phenotypic characterization 
of a non-RT027 and non-RT078 binary toxin-positive ST201 isolate.
