Clostridium difficile is associated with antibiotic-associated diarrhea and 
pseudomembranous colitis in humans. Its 2 major toxins, toxins A and B, enter 
host cells and inactivate GTPases of the Ras homologue/rat sarcoma family by 
glucosylation. Pore formation of the toxins in the endosomal membrane enables 
the translocation of their glucosyltransferase domain into the cytosol, and 
membrane cholesterol is crucial for this process. Here, we asked whether the 
activity of the sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2 (SREBP-2) pathway, 
which regulates the cholesterol content in membranes, affects the susceptibility 
of target cells toward toxins A and B. We show that the SREBP-2 pathway is 
crucial for the intoxication process of toxins A and B by using pharmacological 
inhibitors (PF-429242, 25-hydroxycholesterol) and cells that are specifically 
deficient in SREBP-2 pathway signaling. SREBP-2 pathway inhibition disturbed the 
cholesterol-dependent pore formation of toxin B in cellular membranes. 
Preincubation with the cholesterol-lowering drug simvastatin protected cells 
from toxin B intoxication. Inhibition of the SREBP-2 pathway was without effect 
when the enzyme portion of toxin B was introduced into target cells via the cell 
delivery property of anthrax protective antigen. Taken together, these findings 
allowed us to identify the SREBP-2 pathway as a suitable target for the 
development of antitoxin therapeutics against C. difficile toxins A and 
B.-Papatheodorou, P., Song, S., López-Ureña, D., Witte, A., Marques, F., Ost, G. 
S., Schorch, B., Chaves-Olarte, E., Aktories, K. Cytotoxicity of Clostridium 
difficile toxins A and B requires an active and functional SREBP-2 pathway.
