Clostridium difficile associated disease (CDAD) is the leading infectious cause 
of antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis in the United States. Both the 
incidence and severity of CDAD have been increased over the past two decades. We 
evaluated the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and toxicokinetics of OG253, a novel 
lantibiotic in development for the treatment of CDAD. OG253 was orally 
administered to Wistar Han rats as enteric-coated capsules in a one-day dose 
escalation study, followed by a seven-day repeated dose toxicokinetics study. 
All three doses of OG253 (6.75, 27 and 108 mg/day) were generally well-tolerated 
with no treatment-related clinical signs, alterations in body weight or food 
consumption in both one-day acute tolerability and seven-days repeated dose 
tolerability and toxicokinetics study. OG253 capsule administration neither 
significantly alter the weight of organs nor affect the hematology, coagulation, 
clinical biochemistry parameters and urine pH compared to placebo capsule 
administered rats. LC-MS/MS analysis did not detect OG253 in the plasma, 
indicating that OG253 is not absorbed into the blood from the rat 
gastrointestinal tract. Glandular atrophy of the rectal mucosa was noticed in 
two out of six rats administered with a high dose of OG253. Surprisingly, we 
found that OG253 treatment significantly lowered both serum cholesterol and 
triglyceride levels in both sexes of rats. Overall, there was a 29.8 and 61.38% 
decrease in the serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels, respectively as 
compared to placebo-treated rats. The well-tolerated high dose of OG253 
(425.7 mg/kg/day) is recommended as the MTD for safety and efficacy studies. 
Further preclinical study is needed to evaluate the safety profile of OG253 
under longer exposure.
