Clostridioides difficile toxin B (TcdB) is an intracellular toxin responsible 
for many of the pathologies of C. difficile infection. The two variant forms of 
TcdB (TcdB1 and TcdB2) share 92% sequence identity but have reported differences 
in rates of cell entry, autoprocessing, and overall toxicity. This 
2,366-amino-acid, multidomain bacterial toxin glucosylates and inactivates small 
GTPases in the cytosol of target cells, ultimately leading to cell death. 
Successful cell entry and intoxication by TcdB are known to involve various 
conformational changes in the protein, including a proteolytic autoprocessing 
event. Previous studies found that amino acids 1753 to 1852 influence the 
conformational states of the proximal carboxy-terminal domain of TcdB and could 
contribute to differences between TcdB1 and TcdB2. In the current study, a 
combination of approaches was used to identify sequences within the region from 
amino acids 1753 to 1852 that influence the conformational integrity and 
cytotoxicity of TcdB2. Four deletion mutants with reduced cytotoxicity were 
identified, while one mutant, TcdB2Δ1769-1787, exhibited no detectable 
cytotoxicity. TcdB2Δ1769-1787 underwent spontaneous autoprocessing and was 
unable to interact with CHO-K1 or HeLa cells, suggesting a potential change in 
the conformation of the mutant protein. Despite the putative alteration in 
structural stability, vaccination with TcdB2Δ1769-1787 induced a 
TcdB2-neutralizing antibody response and protected against C. difficile disease 
in a mouse model. These findings indicate that the 19-amino-acid region spanning 
residues 1769 to 1787 in TcdB2 is crucial to cytotoxicity and the structural 
regulation of autoprocessing and that TcdB2Δ1769-1787 is a promising candidate 
for vaccination.
