Clostridium difficile toxin A (TcdA) is a major exotoxin contributing to 
disruption of the colonic epithelium during C. difficile infection. TcdA 
contains a carbohydrate-binding combined repetitive oligopeptides (CROPs) domain 
that mediates its attachment to cell surfaces, but recent data suggest the 
existence of CROPs-independent receptors. Here, we carried out genome-wide 
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9)-mediated screens using a truncated 
TcdA lacking the CROPs, and identified sulfated glycosaminoglycans (sGAGs) and 
low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) as host factors contributing to binding 
and entry of TcdA. TcdA recognizes the sulfation group in sGAGs. Blocking 
sulfation and glycosaminoglycan synthesis reduces TcdA binding and entry into 
cells. Binding of TcdA to the colonic epithelium can be reduced by surfen, a 
small molecule that masks sGAGs, by GM-1111, a sulfated heparan sulfate 
analogue, and by sulfated cyclodextrin, a sulfated small molecule. Cells lacking 
LDLR also show reduced sensitivity to TcdA, although binding between LDLR and 
TcdA are not detected, suggesting that LDLR may facilitate endocytosis of TcdA. 
Finally, GM-1111 reduces TcdA-induced fluid accumulation and tissue damage in 
the colon in a mouse model in which TcdA is injected into the caecum. These data 
demonstrate in vivo and pathological relevance of TcdA-sGAGs interactions, and 
reveal a potential therapeutic approach of protecting colonic tissues by 
blocking these interactions.
