Clostridioides (formerly known as Clostridium) difficile is the leading cause of 
hospital-acquired gastrointestinal infections in the United States and one of 
three urgent health care threats identified by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. C. difficile disease is mediated by the production of toxins 
that disrupt the epithelial barrier and cause a robust host inflammatory 
response. Studies in humans as well as animal models of disease have shown that 
the type of immune response generated against the infection dictates the outcome 
of disease, often irrespective of bacterial burden. Much of the focus on 
immunity during C. difficile infection (CDI) has been on type 3 immunity because 
of the established role for this arm of the immune system in other 
gastrointestinal inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD). For example, interleukin-22 (IL-22) production by group 3 innate lymphoid 
cells (ILC3s) protects against pathobionts translocating across the epithelium 
during CDI. On the other hand, interleukin-17 (IL-17) production by Th17 cells 
increases CDI-associated mortality. Additionally, neutropenia has been 
associated with increased susceptibility to CDI in humans, but increased 
neutrophilia in mouse models correlates with host pathology. Taking the data 
together, these findings suggest dual roles for type 3 immune responses during 
infection. Here, we review the complex role of type 3 immunity during CDI and 
delineate what is known about innate and adaptive cellular immunity as well as 
the downstream effector cytokines known to be important during this infection.
