BACKGROUND: Around 15%-30% of patients develop recurrent Clostridioides 
difficile infection (CDI) as conventional therapies disrupt protective gut 
microbiota. We tested if supplementation with a spore-forming probiotic would 
protect intestinal health in a mouse model of recurrent CD colonization.
METHODS: Methods: Female CF-1 mice were exposed to CD spores (4-log10 
colony-forming units/10 μL) and then randomly assigned to receive either saline 
(CD-S) or probiotic (CD-PRO). Control mice received only saline (control). 
Following confirmation of initial CD colonization, mice were treated with 
vancomycin (10 days). After 5 days, mice recolonized with CD were treated again 
with vancomycin (10 days) and euthanized 5 days later. Fecal samples were 
collected at select time points for bacterial analysis. Following euthanasia, 
blood samples, cecum contents, and the intestine were collected for analysis.
RESULTS: Probiotic supplementation mitigated the antibiotic-induced changes in 
cecum weight (P < .001). Probiotic-supplemented mice had increased messenger RNA 
expression of several immune parameters, accompanied by lower serum iron levels 
compared with CD-S mice (P < .05). Lower expressions of TNF α and calprotectin 
(P ≤ .05) were observed in CD-PRO mice compared with CD-S. The probiotics also 
supported the expression of intestinal tight junction proteins, which were 
diminished in the proximal colon of CD-S mice (P < .05).
CONCLUSION: Mice supplemented with targeted spore-forming probiotics exhibited 
improved immune responses and nutrition immunity properties, which were linked 
with less inflammation and enhanced intestinal barrier proteins during recurrent 
CD colonization.
