Germfree rats monocontaminated with the anaerobic microorganisms Clostridium 
difficile or another Clostridium species (strain G 62) produce auto-antibodies 
to colon antigen. The antigen can be extracted with phenol water from the feces 
of germfree rats. Antibodies, demonstrable by means of passive hemagglutination 
of antigen sensitized sheep erythrocytes appear after monocontamination for 35 
days or longer. The indirect immunofluorescence techniques, applied to sections 
of germfree rat colon, gave positive mucosal staining. The staining was similar 
to that obtained with sera from patients with ulcerative colitis or from rats 
immunized with rabbit colon. No antibodies were found in the sera of germfree 
rats, germfree rats monocontaminated with various other bacteria, conventional 
rats of germfree origin, or conventional Sprague-Dawley rats. Although the 
anti-colon antibodies of the Clostridium infected rats reacted with the same 
feces extract as the antibodies of ulcerative colitis patients or of rabbit 
colon immunized rats, their specificity was different. While the latter 
cross-react with polysaccharide from E. coli O14, those from the 
Clostridium-infected exgermfree rats did not. Rats monocontaminated with Cl. 
difficile also developed antibodies to this organism, but no cross-reaction 
between Cl. difficile antigen and colon antigen could be demonstrated. This 
speaks against breakage of tolerance by cross-reacting bacterial antigen as the 
cause of autoimmunity in these rats. Other possible mechanisms for autoantibody 
production in this model are immunogenic alteration of gastrointestinal mucins 
by bacterial degradation, adjuvant effects of bacterial products, or both.
