Clostridium difficile toxin A (Tx-A) mediates secretion and inflammation in 
experimental enterocolitis. Intravital video microscopy was used to define the 
mechanisms that underlie the inflammatory reactions elicited by direct exposure 
of the microvasculature to Tx-A. Leukocyte adherence and emigration, 
leukocyte-platelet aggregation, and extravasation of FITC-albumin were monitored 
in rat mesenteric venules exposed to Tx-A. Significant increases in leukocyte 
adherence and emigration (LAE) and albumin leakage were noted within 15-30 min 
of Tx-A exposure. These responses were accompanied by mast cell degranulation 
and the formation of platelet-leukocyte aggregates. The Tx-A-induced increases 
in LAE and albumin leakage were significantly attenuated by pretreatment with 
either monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) directed against the leukocyte adhesion 
glycoproteins, CD11/CD18, intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and P-selectin (but 
not E-selectin) or with sialyl Lewis x, a counter-receptor for P-selectin. The 
mast cell stabilizer, lodoxamide, an H1- (but not an H2-) receptor antagonist, 
and diamine oxidase (histaminase) were also effective in reducing the LAE and 
albumin leakage elicited by Tx-A. The platelet-leukocyte aggregation response 
was blunted by an mAb against P-selectin, sialyl Lewis x, and the H1-receptor 
antagonist. These observations indicate that Tx-A induces a leukocyte-dependent 
leakage of albumin from postcapillary venules. Mast cell-derived histamine 
appears to mediate at least part of the leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesion and 
platelet-leukocyte aggregation by engaging H1-receptors on endothelial cells and 
platelets to increase the expression of P-selectin. The adhesion glycoproteins 
CD11/CD18 and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 also contribute to the 
inflammatory responses elicited by toxin A.
