It is generally accepted that most patients with Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhoea acquire the organism from the environment. 
Recently we demonstrated that household pets may constitute a significant 
reservoir of C. difficile through gastrointestinal carriage in up to 39% of cats 
and dogs. These findings suggested that direct transmission from household pets, 
or contamination of the environment by them, may be a factor in the pathogenesis 
of C. difficile-associated diarrhoea. To investigate this possibility, we 
examined isolates of C. difficile from humans, pets and the environment by 
restriction enzyme analysis (REA) and restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP) typing using enhanced chemiluminescence. Both REA and RFLP typing methods 
used Hind III digests of chromosomal DNA. A total of 116 isolates of C. 
difficile from pets (26), veterinary clinic environmental sites (33), humans 
(37) and hospital environmental sites (20) was examined. REA was far more 
discriminatory than RFLP typing and for all isolates there were 34 REA types 
versus 6 RFLP types. There was good correlation between the REA types found in 
isolates from pets and from the veterinary clinic environment, and between 
isolates from humans and from those found in the hospital environment. There 
was, however, no correlation between REA type of C. difficile found in pets and 
isolates of human origin. We conclude that there may still be a risk of humans 
acquiring C. difficile from domestic pets as these findings may be the result of 
geographical variation.
