Clostridium difficile produces a potent enterotoxin and cytotoxin, toxins A and 
B, respectively, which appear to be responsible for pseudomenbranous colitis and 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea. In the present study we explored the neutrophil 
migration evoked by toxin A in the peritoneal cavities and subcutaneous air 
pouches of rats and examined the role of macrophages and their inflammatory 
mediators in this process. Toxin A causes a significant dose-dependent 
neutrophil influx into the peritoneal cavity, with a maximal response at 0.1 
microg/ml and at 4 h. The depletion of macrophages by peritoneal washing 
prevents the toxin A-induced neutrophil migration into the peritoneal cavity. In 
contrast, an increase in macrophages induced by peritoneal injection of 
thioglycolate amplifies this toxin effect on neutrophil migration. Furthermore, 
the injection of supernatants from toxin A-stimulated macrophages into the rat 
peritoneal cavity causes significant neutrophil migration. Pretreatment of rats 
with BWA4C, nordihydroguaiaretic acid, mepacrine, or dexamethasone inhibits the 
neutrophil migration evoked by toxin A in the peritoneal cavities. However, 
pretreatment with the cyclooxygenase inhibitor indomethacin or the 
platelet-activating factor antagonist BN52021 fails to alter toxin A-induced 
neutrophil migration. Toxin A was also injected into air pouches of normal rats 
or rats pretreated with anti-interleukin-1beta (anti-IL-1beta) or anti-tumor 
necrosis factor alpha (anti-TNF-alpha) antibodies. Anti-TNF-alpha or 
anti-IL-1beta antibodies significantly reduce the neutrophil migration induced 
by toxin A. These data suggest that neutrophil migration evoked by toxin A is in 
part dependent on macrophage-derived cytokines, such as TNF-alpha and IL-1beta, 
and leukotrienes. These mediators may help to explain the intense inflammatory 
colitis caused by C. dificile toxin A in an experimental animal model of this 
disease.
