Gold compounds are used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. NF-kappa B is 
a transcription factor implicated in the expression of many inflammatory genes. 
NF-kappa B is activated by signal-induced phosphorylation and subsequent 
degradation of inhibitory I kappa B (inhibitory protein that dissociates from 
NF-kappa B) proteins, and a multisubunit I kappa B kinase (IKK) has been 
identified previously. We tested the effect of various gold compounds on the 
activation of NF-kappa B and IKK in LPS-stimulated RAW 264.7 mouse macrophages. 
A lipophilic gold compound, auranofin, suppressed the LPS-induced increase of 
nuclear kappa B-binding activity, degradation of I kappa B proteins, and IKK 
activation. Auranofin also blocked IKK activation induced by TNF and 
PMA/ionomycin, suggesting that the target of auranofin action is common among 
these diverse signal pathways. In vitro IKK activity was suppressed by addition 
of hydrophilic gold compounds, such as aurothiomalate, aurothioglucose, and 
AuCl3. Other thiol-reactive metal ions such as zinc and copper also inhibited 
IKK activity in vitro, and induction of IKK in LPS-stimulated macrophages. In 
vitro IKK activity required the presence of reducing agent and was blocked by 
addition of thiol group-reactive agents. Two catalytic subunits of IKK complex, 
IKK alpha and IKK beta, were both inhibited by these thiol-modifying agents, 
suggesting the presence of a cysteine sulfhydryl group in these subunits, which 
is critical for enzyme activity. The antiinflammatory activity of gold compounds 
in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis may depend on modification of this 
thiol group by gold.
