OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the clinical relevance and pathogenic significance of 
anti-salivary duct autoantibodies (ASDA) in Sj√∂gren's syndrome (SS) and 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by examining (1) their frequency in healthy controls, 
patients with sicca symptoms, and patients with various autoimmune and infective 
disorders; (2) their localization by confocal microscopy; and (3) their tissue 
distribution and cross reactivity with blood group antigens.
METHODS: Indirect immunofluorescence (IF) was performed on commercial cryostat 
sections of monkey parotid salivary gland. Sections were examined by 
fluorescence and confocal laser scanning microscopy. Sera giving positive 
staining on the ducts were tested by IF on a range of monkey tissues and 
salivary glands from several mammalian species. Blocking experiments were 
performed with human erythrocytes of different ABO blood groups and AB antigens.
RESULTS: We identified 2 distinct ductal staining patterns. The first resembled 
ASDA described in earlier studies and showed patchy bright staining of the 
apical (luminal) surfaces of the ducts and staining of apical cytoplasmic 
vesicles. The other was only observed with anti-mitochondrial antibody positive 
sera and stained the mitochondrial-rich ductal epithelium in a distinctive 
punctate pattern. Antibodies staining the apical surface of ducts were detected 
rarely in patients with antiRo/La autoantibody-positive primary SS (1/76) and RA 
(1/36) and were found in only 1115 with RA and secondary SS. ASDA were detected 
in sera from 13/51 (25.5%) of patients referred to our clinic with limited sicca 
symptoms who were anti-Ro/La antibody-negative and had no typical clinical or 
laboratory features of classical primary SS. The apical ductal staining pattern 
was not observed with sera from 63 healthy controls without sicca symptoms or in 
patients with autoimmune and infective disorders. Twelve of the 13 patients 
whose sera gave ASDA-like staining were blood group O and one group A. Ductal 
staining was abolished in all sera after absorption with blood group AB 
erythrocytes or AB antigen. In 5 patients ductal staining was removed by 
absorption with B erythrocytes but not with A erythrocytes; in the remainder 
ductal reactivity was abolished by both A and B erythrocytes.
CONCLUSION: ASDA seem to occur rarely in patients with primary SS and RA. 
However, isotype-switched IgG AB blood group antibodies cross react with primate 
salivary ducts and may produce false positive ASDA staining. Detection of ASDA 
may be of value in identifying a subset of patients who present with mild sicca 
symptoms without other autoimmune features.
