Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the most common chronic autoimmunopathy, clinically 
leading to joint destruction as a consequence of the chronic inflammatory 
processes. The pathogenesis of this disabling disease is not well understood, 
but molecular events leading to tissue inflammation with cartilage and bone 
destruction are now defined in more detail. Established therapy, slow acting 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) as with low-dose methotrexate 
(MTX) are the accepted 'golden standard' therapies and both lead to a 
significant improvement of disease symptoms, however are unable to stop joint 
destruction. Due to these disappointing treatment options and the identification 
of some inflammatory mediators as therapeutic targets, novel therapeutic agents 
such as monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), cytokine receptor-human immunoglobulin 
constructs or recombinant human proteins have been tested in RA with some 
success. In particular, clinical trials testing anti-TNF-alpha agents either 
alone or in combination with MTX have convincingly demonstrated the feasibility 
and efficacy of these novel approaches to the therapy of RA. Importantly, a 
clinical trial testing combination therapy with chimeric (mouse-human) 
anti-TNF-alpha mAb cA2 (Remicadetrade mark) and MTX could, for the first time in 
any RA trial, show that average radiological progression in the cA2/MTX groups 
could be completely prevented over a 12 month observation period. Similar 
encouraging results might evoke from trials employing other TNF-alpha-directed 
agents like the fully human mAb D(2)E7 or the p75 TNF-alpha-receptor-Ig 
construct, etanercept.
