Degradation of the extracellular matrix occurs under physiological and 
pathological conditions, thought to be principally mediated by a family of 
neutral proteolytic enzymes termed the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). The 
present study was initiated to determine whether mast cells have the ability to 
produce these proteases in diseased and normal human tissue. 
Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization was performed to localize 
interstitial collagenase protein and mRNA transcripts in diseased human tissue. 
The human mast cell line HMC-1 was cultured under serum free conditions, 
stimulated with phorbol mystrate acetate (PMA) and supernatants analyzed by 
Western blotting and zymography to determine the profile of secreted MMPs. The 
dog mast cell line BR, known to secrete gelatinolytic enzymes, was used in 
parallel studies. Total RNA was extracted and analyzed by RT-PCR for the 
expression of tissue inhibitors of MMP (TIMPs). Collagenase-1 protein and mRNA 
were expressed by tryptase and chymase positive human mast cells in all tissue 
analyzed. This proteinase was also detected in the cytoplasm and conditioned 
media of HMC-1 cells. PMA induced gelatinolytic activity in both mast cell lines 
examined. TIMP-1 immunoreactivity was detected and TIMP-1, and -2 (but not 
TIMP-3) mRNA transcripts were amplified from HMC-1 cells. This is the first 
demonstration of the expression of collagenase-1 by human mast cells in both 
inflamed and normal tissues, and by a human mast cell line. MMPs secreted by 
these cells could contribute to the extensive matrix lysis characteristic of 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and inflammatory ocular disorders. 
Alternatively collagenase-1 production by mast cells may play a critical role in 
cell invasion and migration into sites of inflammation.
