Microbial infection can impact on the course of autoimmune disease, both in 
disease-inducing and disease-protecting capacities. Here we investigated if 
infection with Trypanosoma brucei brucei (Tbb), the protozoan causative agent of 
African Sleeping Sickness, could ameliorate the course of CIA in the Dark Agouti 
rat, an experimental model which shares many features with human rheumatoid 
arthritis. Infection of animals with living, but not inoculation with dead Tbb 
resulted in complete or significant reduction of clinical arthritic symptoms. 
Infection prior to collagen immunization was more effective than a later 
treatment, and this effect was related to the level of parasitaemia. Using 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction we detected an increase in 
interferon-gamma mRNA in the draining lymph nodes of Tbb-treated animals 
relative to controls at day 28 after disease induction. Transforming growth 
factor-beta could be detected in the lymph nodes in four out of six animals that 
had received Tbb. In the joints, immunohistochemistry revealed reduced 
production of tumour necrosis factor-alpha in Tbb-treated animals relative to 
controls. The most striking difference between Tbb-infected and control groups, 
as measured by ELISA, was the down-regulation of anti-collagen II IgG antibody 
responses in parasite-infected animals. We conclude that live parasites can 
exert an immunomodulatory and protective effect in CIA in which several 
mechanisms may work in parallel, although the almost complete down-regulation of 
the anti-collagen antibody response may alone explain the protective effect in 
CIA. The described model may be useful in further attempts to use the mechanisms 
involved in parasite immune defence to prevent and treat certain autoimmune 
conditions.
