The inter-alpha-inhibitor (I alpha I) family gathers together several plasma 
protease inhibitors such as I alpha I and pre-alpha-inhibitor (P alpha I) that 
are variously assembled from a set of polypeptide chain precursors designated 
H1P to H3P. In addition to their protease inhibitory activity, a major 
physiological function of I alpha I family members is hyaluronan (HA) binding 
and HA-dependent stabilization of the extracellular matrix surrounding various 
cell types. Also, binding of HA to these molecules has been shown to be an 
important event in tumor cell proliferation and rheumatoid arthritis. However, 
how HA and I alpha I family members first recognize each other has so far 
remained elusive. The so-called BX7B domain found in some HA-binding proteins is 
an HA-binding site in which B represents a basic amino-acid residue and X 
represents any nonacidic residue. This domain has now been identified in the 
N-terminal end of H3P that is a precursor of P alpha I. A series of wild-type or 
mutant recombinant H3P chains produced with a mouse cDNA expressed in 
Escherichia coli allowed us to demonstrate that this domain binds HA in a 
noncovalent fashion. Furthermore, unmasking this HA-binding activity required 
most of H3P to be trimmed off at its C-terminal end. The latter observation was 
confirmed with a natural, mature H3 chain purified from human plasma. Indeed, a 
thermolysin-generated, N-terminal fragment of this H3 chain strongly bound HA 
whereas the intact H3 chain did not. Therefore, in vivo, the HA-binding activity 
of the mature H3 chain within P alpha I may vary with the folding and/or 
fragmentation of this protein.
