Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a systemic disease, is characterized by a chronic 
inflammatory reaction in the synovium of joints and is associated with 
degeneration of cartilage and erosion of juxta-articular bone. Many 
pro-inflammatory cytokines including TNF alpha, chemokines, and growth factors 
are expressed in diseased joints. The rationale that TNF alpha played a central 
role in regulating these molecules, and their pathophysiological potential, was 
initially provided by the demonstration that anti-TNF alpha antibodies added to 
in vitro cultures of a representative population of cells derived from diseased 
joints inhibited the spontaneous production of IL-1 and other pro-inflammatory 
cytokines. Systemic administration of anti-TNF alpha antibody or sTNFR fusion 
protein to mouse models of RA was shown to be anti-inflammatory and joint 
protective. Clinical investigations in which the activity of TNF alpha in RA 
patients was blocked with intravenously administered infliximab, a chimeric 
anti-TNF alpha monoclonal antibody (mAB), has provided evidence that TNF 
regulates IL-6, IL-8, MCP-1, and VEGF production, recruitment of immune and 
inflammatory cells into joints, angiogenesis, and reduction of blood levels of 
matrix metalloproteinases-1 and -3. Randomized, placebo-controlled, multi-center 
clinical trials of human TNF alpha inhibitors have demonstrated their consistent 
and remarkable efficacy in controlling signs and symptoms, with a favorable 
safety profile, in approximately two thirds of patients for up to 2 years, and 
their ability to retard joint damage. Infliximab (a mAB), and etanercept (a 
sTNF-R-Fc fusion protein) have been approved by regulatory authorities in the 
United States and Europe for treating RA, and they represent a significant new 
addition to available therapeutic options.
