OBJECTIVE: To search for potential new therapies to inhibit the progression of 
joint destruction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: We evaluated the dual acting antiinflammatory drug ML3000 
(2,2-dimethyl-6-(4-chlorophenyl)-7-phenyl-2,3-dihydro- H-pyrrolizine-5-yl) 
acetic acid, a dual inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) as well as both 
cyclooxygenases (COX-1 and COX-2) in the rat model of adjuvant arthritis. On Day 
0, female Lewis rats (5 per group) were injected intradermally with complete 
Freund's adjuvant at base of the tail. Treatment began on Day 2; the rats 
received ML3000 (20 or 80 mg/kg/day) twice daily 7 h apart for 28 days and were 
then sacrificed. To reduce pain, the positive control group and 2 treatment 
groups received paracetamol (3 mg/ml water). Joint histology was scored for 
synovial cell proliferation, fibroproliferative pannus, and cartilage and bone 
erosions, as well as diffuse leukocyte infiltrates.
RESULTS: Daily doses of 20 or 80 mg/kg ML3000 significantly reduced the 
arthritis associated deficiency of body growth, the edema/erythema score, and 
splenomegaly. In the ankle joint, ML3000 significantly reduced the overall 
histological score, synovial cell proliferation, and bone/cartilage erosions, 
and inhibited the appearance of fibroproliferative pannus. The addition of 
paracetamol in the drinking water had no influence. No side effects were noted.
CONCLUSION: ML3000 is an antiarthritic drug with a high gastrointestinal 
tolerability, which can reduce synovial cell proliferation and joint erosion and 
is capable of markedly suppressing prostaglandin synthesis.
