AVANT Immunotherapeutics is developing TP-10, a recombinant soluble complement 
receptor type 1 (sCR1), for the potential treatment of reperfusion injury 
(following surgery, ischemic disease and organ transplantation), organ 
rejection, acute inflammatory injury to the lungs and autoimmune diseases 
[348669]. TP-10 has been awarded Orphan Drug status from the FDA for the 
prevention and reduction of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and as a 
treatment for infants undergoing cardiac surgery [180849], [359588]. A 
placebo-controlled phase II trial, conducted at approximately 30 sites in the US 
and involving approximately 600 adult patients undergoing cardiac surgery 
utilizing cardiopulmonary bypass, was initiated in November 2000. This safety 
and efficacy study was designed to assess the ability of TP-10 to mitigate the 
injury to the heart, brain and other organs that occurs when patients are placed 
on cardiopulmonary bypass circuits, thus potentially improving postoperative 
outcomes [391437]. In September 2000, the company was planning a double-blind, 
placebo controlled phase IIb trial in infants undergoing cardiac surgery; AVANT 
expected to initiated in 30 infants in January 2001 [395086]. The data from this 
trial will enable the company to further define its clinical endpoints before 
inititating a pivotal phase III trial in 2001 [382529]. A phase I/II trial of 
TP-10 involving 15 infants, under 12 months of age, undergoing cardiac surgery 
for congenital heart defects was initiated by the company in September 1999. The 
trial will evaluate the ability of TP-10 to mitigate the injury to the heart and 
other organs when patients are placed on cardiopulmonary bypass circuits 
[340602]. Enrollment was complete by January 2000 [352458]. Phase I safety 
trials of TP-10, including studies in adult patients at risk for adult 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), adult patients with first-time myocardial 
infarction (heart attack), and pediatric patients undergoing cardiac surgery 
demonstrated that TP-10 is well tolerated. However, after completion, in 
December 1997, of a phase IIa trial in nine patients with ARDS, AVANT decided to 
cease development for this indication. TP-10 was licensed to Novartis AG for use 
in xeno- and allotransplantation in July 1999. Extensive animal studies have 
shown TP-10 to have potential in a wide variety of complement-mediated 
conditions, including organ transplantation, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid 
arthritis and lupus [238093]. Early work demonstrated favorable results in 
animal models of reperfusion injury [180849] and hyperacute xenograft rejection 
in guinea pig to rat and pig to primate organ transplants [191552]. AVANT has 
received Notices of Allowance (July 1998) from the USPTO for three separate 
patent applications covering pharmaceutical compositions of TP-10, methods of 
purification and methods of certain TP-10 glycoforms for treating diseases or 
disorders resulting from inappropriate complement activation [291776]. In 
January 1999, the company was awarded US-05856297 which covers pharmaceutical 
compositions of TP-10. US-05856300 was also awarded covering compositions and 
methods of producing the drug [312267].
