In the normal human life span, there occur lifestyle-related diseases that may 
be preventable with nontoxic agents. This paper deals with the preventive 
activity of green tea in some lifestyle-related diseases. Green tea is one of 
the most practical cancer preventives, as we have shown in various in vitro and 
in vivo experiments, along with epidemiological studies. Among various 
biological effects of green tea, we have focused on its inhibitory effect on 
TNF-alpha gene expression mediated through inhibition of NF-kappaB and AP-1 
activation. Based on our recent results with TNF-alpha-deficient mice, TNF-alpha 
is an endogenous tumor promoter. TNF-alpha is also known to be a central 
mediator in chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and 
multiple sclerosis. We therefore hypothesized that green tea might be a 
preventive agent for chronic inflammatory diseases. To test this hypothesis, 
TNF-alpha transgenic mice, which overexpress TNF-alpha only in the lungs, were 
examined. The TNF-alpha transgenic mouse is an animal model of human idiopathic 
pulmonary fibrosis which also frequently develops lung cancer. Expressions of 
TNF-alpha and IL-6 were inhibited in the lungs of these mice after treatment 
with green tea in drinking water for 4 months. In addition, judging from the 
results of a prospective cohort study in Saitama Prefecture, Japan, green tea 
helps to prevent cardiovascular disease. In this study, a decreased relative 
risk of death from cardiovascular disease was found for people consuming over 10 
cups of green tea a day, and green tea also had life-prolonging effects on 
cumulative survival. These data suggest that green tea has preventive effects on 
both chronic inflammatory diseases and lifestyle-related diseases (including 
cardiovascular disease and cancer), resulting in prolongation of life span.
