Anti-TNF therapy is effective in rheumatoid arthritis (RA); however, its 
mechanisms of action are incompletely understood. T cell-driven mechanisms are 
thought to play an important role in RA and the effects of TNF blockade on these 
mechanisms are unclear. Adjuvant arthritis (AA) is a T cell dependent model of 
inflammatory arthritis. The aims of this study were to investigate the effects 
of TNF blockade on in vivo T cell cytokine expression and to clarify the role of 
TNF in the inguinal lymph nodes (ILN) in early arthritis. AA was induced in male 
DA rats. Rats received either 3 mg/kg or 10 mg/kg PEG sTNF-RI at days 0, 2 and 4 
postinduction or 10 mg/kg anti-TNF antibody on day of arthritis induction. 
Control rats received either saline or normal sheep serum. Paw volume was 
assessed every 3-4 days. Rats were sacrificed on days 0, 6, 13 and 21 
postinduction. Ankles were removed for quantitative radiology and histology. 
Synovium and ILN were removed for cell culture and to determine mRNA expression 
of cytokines using semiquantitative RT-PCR. TNF and IFN-gamma protein production 
was measured using a bioassay and an ELISA. TNF blockade did not suppress mRNA 
expression of T cell cytokines in the ILN of rats in the early phase of AA, 
suggesting ongoing T cell activity. TNF protein production by ILN cells in 
culture was reduced in PEG sTNF-RI treated rats, although mRNA expression was 
increased in the ILN prior to culture. Early administration of PEG sTNF-RI did 
not attenuate AA, in contrast to an anti-TNF antibody, which suppressed disease. 
A shorter half-life for the PEG sTNF-RI compared with the anti-TNF antibody or 
the development of anti-PEG sTNF-RI antibodies may account for these results.
