Metabolism of the extracellular matrix (ECM) is a complex process that becomes 
disregulated in disease states characterized by chronic inflammation of joints, 
as is seen in rheumatoid arthritis or fibrosis of the lung. The participation of 
certain cytokines in this process is generally accepted (transforming growth 
factor-beta induces fibrosis), while the roles of other cytokines are less 
clear. Oncostatin M (OSM) is a member of the interleukin-6/leukaemia inhibitory 
factor (or gp130) cytokine family, and its participation in inflammation and the 
regulation of ECM metabolism is supported by a number of activities identified 
in vitro, including regulation of matrix metalloproteinase-1 and tissue 
inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1. Local overexpression of transforming growth 
factor-beta has been shown to be fibrogenic in mouse lung, whereas local OSM 
overexpression via intra-articular administration has been shown to induce a 
pannus-like inflammatory response in the synovium of mouse knee joints. Here we 
examine the effects of OSM in the context of those of transforming growth 
factor-beta using an established adenovirus vector that expresses mOSM (AdmOSM). 
We administered the virus intra-nasally into Balb/C mice to achieve high 
expression of OSM in the lung, and examined the effects at various time points. 
AdmOSM resulted in a vigorous inflammatory response by day 7 which was 
characterized by an elevation of neutrophil and mononuclear cell numbers and a 
marked increase in collagen deposition. These data support the use of such 
systems to study the ECM in vivo, and indicate a potential role for OSM in 
inflammatory responses that can modulate steady-state ECM deposition in Balb/C 
mice.
