Glucocorticoids are potent anti-inflammatory molecules used in the treatment of 
asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and other inflammatory 
and dermatological diseases, as well as in posttransplantation immunotherapy. 
Although glucocorticoids have been prescribed for many years, their potential 
side effects, when administered orally, can prevent their long-term use. The 
most serious side effect observed in the clinic is glucocorticoid-induced 
osteoporosis (GIOP). To develop a small animal model to characterize 
glucocorticoid-induced bone loss, we carried out a series of experiments using 
BALB/c mice given daily intraperitoneal doses of the synthetic glucocorticoid, 
dexamethasone. Following dexamethasone treatment, the mice became osteopenic, 
with highly significant decreases in bone formation rate and mineral apposition 
rate, as assessed by standard histomorphometry. Moreover, 3 week treatment with 
dexamethasone resulted in a decrease in trabecular thickness and trabecular 
number with an increase in surface-to-volume ratio of trabeculae in the distal 
femur, as measured using microcomputed tomography (micro-CT). The serum bone 
formation marker, osteocalcin, was dose-dependently decreased in all mice 
treated with dexamethasone and showed a parallel extent of regulation to the 
bone formation rate changes. In addition, serum levels of leptin, recently 
identified as playing a role in the regulation of bone mass, increased following 
dexamethasone treatment. BALB/c mice therefore represent a useful model system 
in which the detrimental effects of glucocorticoids on bone can be studied.
