Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is a useful model for dissecting the genetic 
patterns underlying susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and related 
chronic/inflammatory autoimmune diseases. CIA exhibits three phenotypes 
characteristic of autoimmune disease pathogenesis: abnormal levels of immune 
reactivity to self antigens; chronic inflammation of target organs expressing 
that specific autoantigen; activation and direct participation of invading 
mononuclear cells and resident tissue fibroblasts in organ damage. Over 25 
different quantitative trait loci (QTL) regulating arthritis severity and 
autoantibody in rats with CIA are mapped. QTL-congenic strains show that certain 
CIA-QTLs can modulate arthritis independently These monogenic models are proving 
to be highly informative for fine mapping and function studies, revealing gender 
effects and evidence of gene clusters. Recent genome scans of RA populations 
identified RA-susceptibility loci in chromosome regions homologous to rat 
chromosomal segments housing CIA-QTLs. Also, CIA-QTLs frequently co-localize 
with susceptibility QTLs mapped in other rat arthritis models induced with 
non-immunogenic adjuvant oils and/or in rat autoimmune models of multiple 
sclerosis and diabetes. Common autoimmunity genes and inflammation genes 
important to several human diseases are likely being detected in the various rat 
disease models. Continued dissection of the genetic underpinnings of rat 
arthritis models should provide candidate genes for investigation in human 
patients and lead to a clearer understanding of the complex genetics of RA.
