The most commonly used animal model for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), induced by immunization with type II collagen 
(CII), a cartilage restricted protein. In this work we show that type XI 
collagen (CXI), which is a minor component in cartilage, induces a different 
form of erosive and chronic relapsing polyarthritis in rats. Using a series of 
inbred rat strains involving various genetic backgrounds (DA, LEW, E3), and 
congenic MHC regions (a, u, f, n, c, d), we found that CXI induced arthritis 
(C(XI)IA) is associated with the RT1f haplotype in contrast to CII induced 
arthritis (C(II)IA), which is associated with the RT1a and RT1u haplotypes. The 
C(XI)IA follows a chronic disease course affecting peripheral joints with both 
progression and relapses, which appear not to cease (occurring >800 days). 
Susceptible strains showed a sustained antibody response to CXI with time 
indicating that the autoimmune response was self-perpetuated. Microscopic 
analysis of the joints at different stages demonstrated the severe destruction 
of bone and cartilage by pannus tissue consisting of activated macrophages and T 
cells. The main difference to joints from rats with C(II)IA was larger numbers 
of infiltrating lymphocytes and these tended to form follicle-like aggregates. 
Surprisingly, males were more susceptible to C(XI)IA than females whereas the 
opposite has been observed in other rat arthritis models, including C(II)IA. 
Taken together, C(XI)IA is a chronic relapsing and erosive polyarthritis that is 
MHC associated, which in fact fulfills the criteria for diagnosis of RA. Thus 
the C(XI)IA model will be useful as a novel and relevant animal model for RA.
