Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are frequently used as analgesics. 
Despite the fact that clinical experience indicates a considerable disparity in 
the analgesic efficacy of NSAIDs, the animal models of nociception do not allow 
a clear distinction to be made between the analgesic properties of these agents. 
In contrast to nociceptive pain, clinical pain is characterised by hyperalgesia. 
Therefore, we evaluated the anti-hyperalgesic effects of the four NSAIDs 
nimesulide, diclofenac, celecoxib and rofecoxib which are widely used to treat 
inflammatory pain. We performed two animal studies in which each drug was 
administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) at its previously defined ED50 for the 
anti-inflammatory effect in the rat (i.e. the inhibition of carrageenan-induced 
hindpaw oedema measured by plethysmometry). In the first study, nimesulide (2.9 
mg/kg) completely inhibited the development of thermal hindpaw hyperalgesia 
induced by the injection of formalin in the tail, whereas diclofenac (3.0 mg/kg) 
or celecoxib (12.7 mg/kg) partly reduced the hyperalgesia, and rofecoxib (3.0 
mg/kg) was ineffective. In the second study, nimesulide and diclofenac were 
significantly more effective than celecoxib and rofecoxib in reducing the 
mechanical hindpaw hyperalgesia induced by the intraplantar injection of 
Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA). The anti-hyperalgesic activity of the drugs 
was also investigated in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. After a single oral 
dose, all drugs reduced the inflammatory hyperalgesia. However, only nimesulide 
was effective 15 minutes after treatment. Moreover, nimesulide (100 mg) was 
significantly more effective than rofecoxib (25 mg). Overall, our data 
demonstrate that NSAIDs may show different anti-hyperalgesic properties. 
Nimesulide seems to be particularly effective and fast-acting against 
inflammatory pain.
