OBJECTIVE: To determine if the new, orally active C5a receptor antagonist, the 
cyclic peptide AcF-[OPdChaWR], reduces the severity of pathology in a rat model 
of immune-mediated monarticular arthritis.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in the right knee of previously sensitized rats 
by the intraarticular injection of methylated bovine serum albumin. Rats were 
examined for either 14 days or 28 days, or for 49 days following a second 
antigen challenge at 28 days. The C5a antagonist (1 or 3 mg/kg/day) and/or 
ibuprofen (30 mg/kg/day) were administered orally on a daily basis either before 
or after arthritis induction.
RESULTS: Rats receiving AcF-[OPdChaWR] had significant reductions in right knee 
swelling, gait disturbance, lavaged joint cell numbers, and right knee 
histopathology, as well as in serum levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(TNFalpha) and intraarticular levels of interleukin-6 and TNFalpha on day 14. In 
the 14- and 28-day studies, ibuprofen resulted in a similar reduction in gait 
abnormalities and intraarticular inflammatory cells compared with the C5a 
antagonist, but was less effective in reducing knee swelling over the course of 
the study and had no effect on knee histopathology. Combination therapy with 
AcF-[OPdChaWR] and ibuprofen resulted in no greater efficacy than with the C5a 
antagonist alone. Rats injected twice with the antigen in the 49-day study 
displayed the most severe histopathology and this, as well as knee swelling and 
gait abnormalities, was significantly reduced by repeated treatment with the C5a 
antagonist.
CONCLUSION: An agent that inhibits the action of C5a in this model significantly 
reduced joint pathology, while ibuprofen was not effective. C5a antagonists 
could therefore have broader therapeutic benefits than nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs as antiarthritic agents for rheumatoid arthritis.
