Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are believed to be pivotal enzymes in the 
invasion of articular cartilage by synovial tissue in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 
Here, we investigated the effects of gene transfer of tissue inhibitors of 
metalloproteinases (TIMPs) on the invasiveness of RA synovial fibroblasts (RASF) 
in vitro and in vivo. Adenoviral vectors (Ad) were used for gene transfer. The 
effects of AdTIMP-1 and AdTIMP-3 gene transfer on matrix invasion were 
investigated in vitro in a transwell system. Cartilage invasion in vivo was 
studied in the SCID mouse co-implantation model for 60 days. In addition, the 
effects of AdTIMP-1 and AdTIMP-3 on cell proliferation were investigated. A 
significant reduction in invasiveness was demonstrated in vitro as well as in 
vivo in both the AdTIMP-1- and AdTIMP-3-transduced RASF compared with 
untransduced SF or SF that were transduced with control vectors. in vitro, the 
number of invading cells was reduced to 25% (P<0.001) in the AdTIMP-1-transduced 
cells and to 13% (P<0.0001) in the AdTIMP-3-transduced cells (% of untransduced 
cells). Cell proliferation was significantly inhibited by AdTIMP-3 and, less, by 
AdTIMP-1. In conclusion, overexpression of TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 by Ad gene transfer 
results in a marked reduction of the invasiveness of RASF in vitro and in the 
SCID mouse model. Apart from the inhibition of MMPs, a reduction in 
proliferation rate may contribute to this effect. These results suggest that 
overexpression of TIMPs, particularly TIMP-3 at the invasive front of pannus 
tissue, may provide a novel therapeutic strategy for inhibiting joint 
destruction in RA.
