Many findings demonstrated that Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and Proteoglycans 
(PGs) possess antioxidant activity. Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is an 
experimental animal model similar to human rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in which 
free radicals are involved. Sodium salicylate can be used as a chemical trap for 
hydroxyl radicals (OH*), the most damaging reactive oxygen species (ROS), 
yielding 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid), (2,5-DHBA) and 2,3-dihydroxybenzoic acid 
(2,3-DHBA). The measurement of these two acids in the plasma allows to 
indirectly assess the production of OH* radicals. The aim of the study was to 
investigate the effect of hyaluronic acid (HYA) (30 mg/kg i.p.) or 
chondroitin-4-sulphate (C4S) (30 mg/kg i.p.), on free radical production in 
Lewis rats subjected to CIA. After the immunization with bovine collagen type II 
in complete Freund's adjuvant, rats developed an erosive hind paw arthritis, 
that produced high plasma OH* levels assayed as 2,3-DHBA and 2,5-DHBA, primed 
lipid peroxidation, evaluated by analyzing conjugated dienes (CD) in the 
articular cartilage; decreased the concentration of endogenous vitamin E (VE) 
and catalase (CA) in the joint cartilage; enhanced macrophage inflammatory 
protein-2 (MIP-2) serum levels and increased elastase (ELA) evaluated as an 
index of activated leukocyte polymophonuclear (PMNs) accumulation in the 
articular joints. The administration of HYA and C4S starting at the onset of 
arthritis (day 11) for 20 days, limited inflammation and the clinical signs in 
the knee and paw, reduced OH* production, decreased CD levels, partially 
restored the endogenous antioxidants VE and CA, reduced MIP-2 serum levels and 
limited PMNs infiltration. The results indicate that the GAGs HYA and C4S 
significantly reduce free radical production in CIA and could be used as a tool 
to investigate the role of antioxidants in RA.
