To evaluate the antioxidant activity of the glycosaminoglycans hyaluronic acid 
(HYA) and chondroitin-4-sulphate (C4S), we used a rat model of collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA). Arthritis was induced in Lewis rats by multiple intradermal 
injections of 250 microl of emulsion containing bovine type II collagen in 
complete Freund's adjuvant at the base of the tail and into three to five other 
sites on the back. Rats were challenged again with the same antigen preparation 
7 days later. Disease developed about 11 days after the second immunization. The 
effects of treatment in the rats were monitored by biochemical parameters and by 
macroscopic and histological evaluations in blood, synovial tissue and articular 
cartilage. Arthritis produced the following symptoms: severe periarticular 
erythema, edema and inflammation in the hindpaws; membrane peroxidation in the 
cartilage of the joints; endogenous antioxidant wasting; high tumour necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) plasma levels; and synovial neutrophil accumulation. 
Treatment with HYA and C4S, starting at the onset of arthritis for 10 days, 
limited the erosive action of the disease in the articular joints of knee and 
paw, reduced lipid peroxidation, restored the endogenous antioxidants reduced 
glutathione (GSH) and superoxide dismutase, decreased plasma TNF-alpha levels, 
and limited synovial neutrophil infiltration. These data confirm that erosive 
destruction of the joint cartilage in CIA is due at least in part to free 
radicals released by activated neutrophils and produced by other biochemical 
pathways. The beneficial effects obtained with the treatment suggest that HYA 
and C4S could be considered natural endogenous macromolecules to limit erosive 
damage in CIA or as a useful tool with which to study the involvement of free 
radicals in rheumatoid arthritis.
