Bucillamine has potential to attenuate or prevent damage during myocardial 
infarction, cardiac surgery and organ transplantation. Bucillamine, a cysteine 
derivative that contains two donatable thiol groups, is capable of replenishing 
the thiol group in glutathione, thereby reactivating this endogenous defense 
against oxidant injury. Bucillamine rapidly enters cells by the same mechanism 
that normally transports the amino acid cysteine. Bucillamine is a more potent 
thiol donor than other cysteine derivatives: approximately 16-fold more potent 
than N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst(R)) in vivo. In addition bucillamine appears to 
have additional anti-inflammatory effects unrelated to its antioxidant effect. 
Oral bucillamine is used clinically in Asia for treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis. There is a strong preclinical evidence that parenteral infusion of 
this agent is efficacious in acute settings characterized by inflammation and 
oxidative stress. In an investigator-blinded, rigorous intact dog model, 
consisting of 90 min of coronary artery occlusion and 48 h of reperfusion, 
bucillamine, given i.v. during the first 3 h of reperfusion, substantially 
reduced myocardial infarct size. Livers exposed to 24 h of cold ischemia were 
markedly protected by bucillamine in several transplantation models. In Phase I 
human studies in normal volunteers, bucillamine at doses up to 25 mg/kg/h i.v. 
for 3 h elicited no serious toxicity. On the basis of pharmacokinetic analyses 
of blood levels during these studies it was concluded that bucillamine, infused 
at i.v. doses > or =10 mg/kg/h for 3 h to humans could be expected to be 
therapeutically effective in myocardial infarction, organ transplantation and 
other acute inflammatory syndromes.
