Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is an animal model of autoimmunity that has 
been studied extensively because of its similarities to rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). CIA is induced in genetically susceptible strains of mice by immunization 
with type II collagen (CII), and both T cell and B cell immunity to CII are 
required for disease manifestation. Like RA, CIA is primarily an autoimmune 
disease of articular joints and susceptibility to CIA is linked to specific 
class II molecules of the major histocompatibility complex (H-2(r) and H-2(q)). 
Recently, it was demonstrated that transgenic expression of HLA-DR1 (*0101) or 
DR4 (*0401) molecules associated with susceptibility to RA also conferred 
susceptibility to CIA in the mouse model. The T cell response to CII has been 
extensively characterized in both the DR transgenic and naturally susceptible 
mouse strains, including the antigenic determinants recognized, the role of post 
transcriptional modifications of these determinants in the pathogenic T cell 
response, and the cytokines produced. Like most class II-mediated autoimmune 
diseases, the cytokine production of CII-specific T cells reflects a Th1 
phenotype of the autoimmune response. While the direct role of T cells in the 
pathogenesis of CIA is unclear, the B cell response in terms of anti-CII 
immunoglobulin is critical to the development of the disease. This response, 
predominated by the IgG2 isotype, requires the activation of the complement 
cascade for the development of CIA. In recent years, the pathogenesis of this 
model has been studied extensively and the CIA model is proving to be a valuable 
asset for the design of new immunotherapeutics for the potential treatment of RA 
and other autoimmune diseases.
