OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory disease and an 
angiogenic disease. However, the molecular mechanisms promoting angiogenesis in 
RA are not clearly identified. Our objective was to study the role of an 
endothelium-specific receptor tyrosine kinase, Tie2, in angiogenesis of 
inflammatory arthritis.
METHODS: Expression of Tie2 and its ligand, angiopoietin 1 (Ang1), in human 
synovium was examined by immunohistochemistry and Western blot. A novel synovium 
vascular window model was established to study the role of Tie2 in angiogenesis 
in vivo. Primary cultured endothelial cells and synoviocytes were used to study 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha)-induced Tie2 and Ang1 expression.
RESULTS: Tie2 was implicated in pathologic angiogenesis. We observed that Tie2 
and Ang1 were elevated in human RA synovium. Using a novel collagen-induced 
arthritis synovial window model, we demonstrated that Tie2 signaling regulated 
arthritis angiogenesis in vivo. We also showed that Tie2 mediated TNF 
alpha-induced angiogenesis in a mouse cornea assay. In addition, we observed 
that TNF alpha can regulate Tie2 activation in multiple ways that may involve 
interactions between endothelial cells and synoviocytes. TNF alpha up-regulates 
Tie2 in endothelial cells through nuclear factor kappa B, and it up-regulates 
Ang1 in synoviocytes. These findings suggest paracrine regulation of 
angiogenesis between endothelial cells and synoviocytes.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that Tie2 regulates angiogenesis in 
inflammatory synovium. Tie2 signaling is an important angiogenic mediator that 
links the proinflammatory cytokine TNF alpha to pathologic angiogenesis.
