OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of vascular endothelial growth factor B 
(VEGF-B) in 2 mouse models of arthritis, antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) and 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: For AIA studies, monarticular AIA was induced by methylated bovine 
serum albumin (mBSA) priming of Vegfb gene knockout (Vegfb(-/-)) and wild-type 
(Vegfb(+/+)) mice, followed by intraarticular injection of mBSA or saline 
control 8 days later. CIA was induced in Vegfb(-/-) and Vegfb(+/+) mice by 
intradermal injection of chick type II collagen in adjuvant. Arthritis was 
monitored in both models using defined criteria (clinical and histologic). 
Angiogenesis was measured by synovial vessel density in diseased and control 
joints.
RESULTS: In AIA studies, Vegfb(+/+) mice displayed significant knee joint 
swelling and synovial inflammation 7 days after intraarticular injection of 
antigen. Synovial inflammation was associated with angiogenesis, since vessel 
density in AIA synovium was significantly higher in arthritic than in control 
joints from the same animal. Knee joint swelling, synovial inflammation, and 
inflammation-associated vessel density in arthritic joints were reduced in 
Vegfb(-/-) mice compared with arthritic joints from Vegfb(+/+) mice. Similarly, 
in CIA, both disease incidence and mean clinical severity scores were 
significantly reduced in Vegfb(-/-) mice compared with Vegfb(+/+) mice. Mean 
histologic severity scores and mean synovial vessel density were reduced in 
diseased joints from Vegfb(-/-) mice when compared with diseased joints from 
Vegfb(+/+) mice.
CONCLUSION: The reduction in inflammation-associated synovial angiogenesis in 
Vegfb(-/-) mice implicates VEGF-B in pathologic vascular remodeling in 
inflammatory arthritis. VEGF-B may be an attractive target in the design of 
anti-angiogenic therapies for rheumatoid arthritis.
