T cell recognition of the type II collagen (CII) 260-270 peptide is a bottleneck 
for the development of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), an animal model of 
rheumatoid arthritis. We have earlier made C3H.Q mice expressing CII with 
glutamic acid instead of aspartic acid at position 266 (the MMC-C3H.Q mouse), 
similar to the rat and human CII epitope, which increases binding to MHC class 
II and leads to effective presentation of the peptide in vivo. These mice show T 
cell tolerance to CII, but also develop severe arthritis. The present 
investigation shows that non-MHC genes play a decisive role in determining 
tolerance and arthritis susceptibility. We bred MMC into B10.Q mice, which 
display similar susceptibility to CIA induced with rat CII as the C3H.Q mice. In 
contrast to MMC-C3H.Q mice, MMC-B10.Q mice were completely resistant to 
arthritis. Nontransgenic (B10.Q x C3H.Q)F(1) mice were more susceptible to CIA 
than either of the parental strains, but introduction of the MMC transgene leads 
to CIA resistance, showing that the protection is dominantly inherited from 
B10.Q. In an attempt to break the B10-mediated CIA protection in MMC-transgenic 
mice, we introduced a transgenic, CII-specific, TCR beta-chain specific for the 
CII(260-270) glycopeptide, in the highly CIA-susceptible (B10.Q x DBA/1)F(1) 
mice. The magnification of the autoreactive CII-specific T cell repertoire led 
to increased CIA susceptibility, but the disease was less severe than in mice 
lacking the MMC transgene. This finding is important for understanding CIA and 
perhaps also rheumatoid arthritis, as in both diseases MHC class II-restricted T 
cell recognition of the glycosylated CII peptide occurs.
