A contributing role of neurogenic inflammation has provided a new dimension in 
understanding the pathogenesis of various cutaneous and systemic inflammatory 
diseases such as atopic dermatitis, urticaria, rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative 
colitis and bronchial asthma. Several critical observations, such as (i) 
psoriasis resolves at sites of anaesthesia, (ii) neuropeptides are upregulated, 
and (iii) there is a marked proliferation of terminal cutaneous nerves in 
psoriatic plaques, encouraged us to search for a mechanism of neural influence 
in inflammation and inflammatory diseases. In immunohistochemical studies, we 
found that keratinocytes in lesional and nonlesional psoriatic tissue express 
high levels of nerve growth factor (NGF) and that there is a marked upregulation 
of NGF receptors, p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) and tyrosine kinase A 
(TrkA), in the terminal cutaneous nerves of psoriatic lesions. As keratinocytes 
of psoriatic plaques express increased levels of NGF, it is likely that murine 
nerves will promptly proliferate into the transplanted plaques on a severe 
combined immunodeficient mouse. Indeed, we have noted marked proliferation of 
nerve fibers in transplanted psoriatic plaques compared with the few nerves in 
transplanted normal human skin. By double label immunofluorescence staining, we 
have further demonstrated that in these terminal cutaneous nerves there is a 
marked upregulation of neuropeptides, such as substance P and calcitonin 
gene-related protein. These observations, as well as recent findings about 
NGF-induced chemokine expression in keratinocytes, further substantiate a role 
of the NGF-p75NTR-TrkA system in the inflammatory process of psoriasis. 
Currently, we are evaluating antagonists to selected neuropeptides and 
NGF/receptors, with the expectation of identifying pharmacological agents to 
counter neurogenic inflammation in psoriasis.
