OBJECTIVE: To clarify the in vivo function of follistatin-related protein 
(FRP)/TSC-36/FSTL1 in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), we investigated the roles of 
FRP in a mouse model of arthritis.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in BALB/c mice by injecting anti-type II collagen 
monoclonal antibody and lipopolysaccharide. Mice were treated with daily 
intraperitoneal injections of 20 microg of recombinant FRP. Development of 
arthritis was assessed by the clinical score and footpad swelling. Histologic 
examination of affected paws was performed on day 21 after the onset of 
arthritis. The gene expression profiles of affected paws in FRP-treated and 
untreated mice were compared using commercially available complementary DNA 
(cDNA) arrays. The difference in gene expression was confirmed by real-time 
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Treatment with recombinant FRP showed significant amelioration of the 
arthritis severity. Histologic analyses confirmed this finding and revealed the 
alleviation of cellular infiltration into the synovium as well as cartilage 
damage. The significant decrease in the amount of urinary deoxypyridinoline also 
indicated the ameliorative effect of FRP on joint destruction. Moreover, cDNA 
array analysis of the gene expression profile in FRP-treated arthritic lesions 
revealed a reduced expression of the c-fos, ets-2, IL6, MMP3, and MMP9 genes, 
some of which are thought to be associated with synovial inflammation and joint 
destruction.
CONCLUSION: These findings from in vivo experiments suggest that FRP could be 
one of the key molecules in the treatment of inflammatory joint diseases such as 
RA.
