The fusion of a murine B cell and a myeloma cell generates a hybridoma that 
produces monoclonal antibody (mAb). These murine mAb induce the HAMA (human 
anti-mouse antibodies) response. Murine mAb have been modified by genetic 
engineering, producing molecules with a higher proportion of human protein. At 
present, chimeric, humanized and fully human mAb are available. mAb block 
interactions between target molecules and their ligands or trigger the lyses of 
mAb-coated tumor cells. Numerous mAb have been developed using the recombinant 
DNA technology and several are available in the market. Trastuzumab, against 
HER2/neu, is useful in breast cancer; rituximab, against CD20 in B lymphocytes 
is useful in lymphoma; alemtuzumah, against CD52 is used in lymphoma and 
leukemia; daclizumab and basiliximab block the IL-2 receptor interaction and 
reduce acute rejection in kidney transplantation; abciximab, an antagonist of 
GPIIb/IIIa platelet receptor, is used in patients undergoing acute coronary 
syndromes. In autoimmunity diseases, blocking tumor necrosis factor by 
infliximab and adalimumab has demonstrated excellent results. Thus, infliximab 
is useful in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Crohn's disease and 
ulcerative colitis while adalimumab is the first fully human mAb available for 
RA. Infliximab and adalimumab reduce signs and symptoms in RA and they also 
interfere with progression of joint damage. Finally, the direct benefits of 
antagonist treatment can occur at the expense of a major adverse effect in some 
other biological function.
