OBJECTIVE: To examine expression of CD40 on articular chondrocytes derived from 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and osteoarthritis (OA) and to 
investigate roles of CD40 on articular chondrocytes in production of 
inflammatory mediators associated with degradation of articular cartilage.
METHODS: Articular cartilage samples were obtained from patients with RA and OA 
at total knee arthroplasty. Expression of CD40 on chondrocytes was examined 
using immunohistochemistry, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR), and flow cytometry. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), 
interleukin 6 (IL-6), matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-3, and tissue inhibitor of 
matrix metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 in culture supernatants of chondrocytes were 
measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical staining revealed that CD40 was expressed on RA 
chondrocytes in vivo, but not in OA chondrocytes. RT-PCR and flow cytometry 
showed that cultured articular chondrocytes from RA patients, but not from OA 
patients, constitutively expressed CD40, and that interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) 
enhanced the expression of CD40 on chondrocytes from both RA and OA patients. 
Membrane fraction of mouse myeloma Ag8 cells that was transfected with human 
CD154 (Ag8-hCD154) induced production of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and MMP-3 in RA 
chondrocytes, and pretreatment of RA chondrocytes with IFN-gamma enhanced the 
response. OA chondrocytes did not respond to stimulation with the membrane 
fraction of Ag8-hCD154 cells alone, but the cells did produce TNF-alpha, IL-6, 
and MMP-3 after pretreatment with IFN-gamma.
CONCLUSION: CD40-CD154 interaction augments the expression of inflammatory 
cytokines and MMP in chondrocytes and contributes to an intrinsic process of 
cartilage degradation in RA.
