Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is a chronic inflammatory disease bearing all 
the hallmarks of rheumatoid arthritis, e.g. polyarthritis, synovitis, and 
subsequent cartilage/bone erosions. One feature of the disease contributing to 
joint damage is synovial hyperplasia. The factors responsible for the 
hyperplasia are unknown; however, an imbalance between rates of cell 
proliferation and cell death (apoptosis) has been suggested. To evaluate the 
role of a major pathway of cell death - Fas (CD95)/FasL - in the pathogenesis of 
CIA, DBA/1J mice with a mutation of the Fas gene (lpr) were generated. The 
susceptibility of the mutant DBA-lpr/lpr mice to arthritis induced by collagen 
type II was evaluated. Contrary to expectations, the DBA-lpr/lpr mice developed 
significantly milder disease than the control littermates. The incidence of 
disease was also significantly lower in the lpr/lpr mice than in the controls 
(40% versus 81%; P < 0.05). However DBA-lpr/lpr mice mounted a robust immune 
response to collagen, and the expression of local proinflammatory cytokines such 
as, e.g., tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and IL-6 were increased at the 
onset of disease. Since the contribution of synovial fibroblasts to inflammation 
and joint destruction is crucial, the potential activating effect of Fas on 
mouse fibroblast cell line NIH3T3 was investigated. On treatment with anti-Fas 
in vitro, the cell death of NIH3T3 fibroblasts was reduced and the expression of 
proinflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and IL-6 was increased. These findings 
suggest that impairment of immune tolerance by increased T-cell reactivity does 
not lead to enhanced susceptibility to CIA and point to a role of Fas in joint 
destruction.
