OBJECTIVE: To study the specific contribution of MAP kinase activator c-Raf-1 
and one of its downstream transcription factors, c-Myc, to the growth and 
invasive behavior of rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASFs).
METHODS: RASFs were transduced with retroviral constructs expressing 
dominant-negative mutants of c-Raf-1 or c-Myc (DN c-Raf-1 or DN c-Myc, 
respectively) or with the mock vector. The expression of wild-type and mutant 
proteins was confirmed by Western blotting. Growth curves of RASFs were 
recorded, and apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry. Invasiveness of RASFs 
was assessed in the SCID mouse model of RA. Immunohistochemistry was used to 
study the effects of DN c-Raf-1 on phosphorylated c-Jun and matrix 
metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) in RASFs implanted into SCID mice. The 
phosphorylation of ERK and JNK in DN c-Raf-1- and mock-transduced RASFs was 
determined in vitro by Western blotting. The levels of MMPs in these cells were 
measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: Neither DN c-Raf-1 alone nor DN c-Myc alone significantly altered 
proliferation or apoptosis of RASFs, but both mutants together rapidly induced 
apoptosis. Inhibition of c-Raf-1 or c-Myc significantly reduced the invasiveness 
of RASFs in the SCID mouse model. DN c-Raf-1 decreased the phosphorylation of 
ERK and JNK in vitro and reduced the in vivo expression of phosphorylated c-Jun 
as well as the expression of disease-relevant MMPs. As determined by 
quantitative PCR, the inhibition was most pronounced for MMP-1 and MMP-3.
CONCLUSION: The data demonstrate that Ras- and c-Myc-dependent signaling events 
cooperate to regulate the growth and invasiveness of RASFs. Targeting of both 
c-Raf-1 and c-Myc may constitute an interesting therapeutic approach in RA.
