OBJECTIVE: Ex vivo and in vivo micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) combined 
with a novel image analysis algorithm were used to quantify cortical bone loss 
and periosteal new bone formation for therapeutic evaluation in a murine model 
of collagen-induced arthritis.
METHODS: An automated algorithm was created to locate 5 metatarsophalangeal and 
3 metacarpophalangeal joints in 3-dimensional micro-CT images of mouse paws for 
evaluation of joint cortical bone volume (JCBV) within close proximity of the 
joints as well as cortical bone mineral density and periosteal new bone 
formation within the paws. For validation, automated estimates of JCBV were 
compared with radiographic visual scores (RVS) in 4 treatment groups (n = 9 per 
group): rat anti-mouse CD11a monoclonal antibody, methotrexate (MTX), anti-CD11a 
plus MTX, and saline only. In a separate study, serial images of hind limbs were 
evaluated in 2 treatment groups: murine tumor necrosis factor receptor II-Fc 
fusion protein (mTNFRII; n = 10) and control antibody (n = 7).
RESULTS: Automated estimates of the JCBV were significantly correlated with the 
RVS (hind paws R = -0.94, front paws R = -0.81, combined R = -0.87). The 
anti-CD11a group had significantly higher JCBV compared with controls. In the 
serial study, the automated estimate of JCBV detected significant treatment 
effects in the mTNFRII-Fc group compared with controls. Cortical bone mineral 
density was significantly higher in all treatment groups compared with controls.
CONCLUSION: Micro-CT combined with a novel image analysis technique (estimation 
of JCBV) provides a fully automated means to quantify bone destruction in a 
mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis.
