OBJECTIVE: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in the mouse is one of the most 
widely used autoimmune experimental models, with many features similar to 
rheumatoid arthritis. This study sought to identify potential genetic regulatory 
mechanisms of CIA in major histocompatibility complex-matched (H2-q) F(2) hybrid 
mice.
METHODS: We used 126 polymorphic markers to perform simple sequence-length 
polymorphism analysis on 290 F(2) hybrids of arthritis-susceptible (DBA/1J) and 
arthritis-resistant (FVB/N) inbred mouse strains. The major clinical traits 
(disease severity and onset) were assessed, and serum antibodies specific to 
type II collagen (CII) were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 
270 F(2) mice. Lymph nodes from 94 F(2) mice were used to test the ratio of CD4 
to CD8 by fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis, and cell proliferation 
was determined by XTT test.
RESULTS: Two quantitative trait loci (QTLs) identified in previous studies were 
confirmed; these were severity-controlling Cia2 and onset-controlling Cia4 on 
chromosome 2. Moreover, we identified 5 new QTLs, 1 for CII-specific IgG2a 
antibodies on chromosome 5, 2 controlling the CII-specific IgG1 antibody 
response on chromosomes 10 and 13, 1 for the CD4:CD8 ratio on chromosome 2, and 
1 for cell proliferation (measured by XTT test) on chromosome 16. Complement 
component C5 was identified as the probable main candidate gene for the QTLs 
Cia2 and Cia4. F(2) mice carrying a 2-basepair deletion of C5, the FVB/N allele, 
had low incidence and less severe disease as compared with those carrying the 
DBA/1J allele.
CONCLUSION: This genome scan provides additional evidence confirming the role of 
C5 as a probable candidate gene for Cia2 and Cia4 loci, and identifies new QTLs 
controlling new traits in autoimmune arthritis.
