Tristetraprolin (TTP) is the best-studied member of a small family of three 
proteins in humans that is characterized by a tandem CCCH zinc finger (TZF) 
domain with highly conserved sequences and spacing. Although initially 
discovered as a gene that could be induced rapidly and transiently by the 
stimulation of fibroblasts with growth factors and mitogens, it is now known 
that TTP can bind to AU-rich elements in mRNA, leading to the removal of the 
poly(A) tail from that mRNA and increased rates of mRNA turnover. This activity 
was discovered after TTP-deficient mice were created and found to have a 
systemic inflammatory syndrome with severe polyarticular arthritis and 
autoimmunity, as well as medullary and extramedullary myeloid hyperplasia. The 
syndrome seemed to be due predominantly to excess circulating tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), resulting from the increased stability of the 
TNF-alpha mRNA and subsequent higher rates of secretion of the cytokine. The 
myeloid hyperplasia might be due in part to increased stability of 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). This review 
highlights briefly the characteristics of the TTP-deficiency syndrome in mice 
and its possible genetic modifiers, as well as recent data on the 
characteristics of the TTP-binding site in the TNF-alpha and GM-CSF mRNAs. 
Recent structural data on the characteristics of the complex between RNA and one 
of the TTP-related proteins are reviewed, and used to model the TTP-RNA binding 
complex. We review the current knowledge of TTP sequence variants in humans and 
discuss the possible contributions of the TTP-related proteins in mouse 
physiology and in human monocytes. The TTP pathway of TNF-alpha and GM-CSF mRNA 
degradation is a possible novel target for anti-TNF-alpha therapies for 
rheumatoid arthritis, and also for other conditions proven to respond to 
anti-TNF-alpha therapy.
