OBJECTIVE: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in the rhesus monkey is a nonhuman 
primate model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The close phylogenetic relationship 
between humans and the rhesus monkey makes this model useful for the preclinical 
safety and efficacy testing of new therapies that are inactive in animals more 
distinctly related to humans. In this study, we tested the therapeutic potential 
of a novel, small molecular weight antagonist of CCR5, SCH-X, in this model.
METHODS: CIA was induced in 10 rhesus monkeys. The animals were allocated to 
receive SCH-X or saline as the control (n = 5 in each group). Treatment was 
initiated on the day of CIA induction and continued for 45 days. Monkeys were 
monitored before and 63 days after CIA induction for macroscopic signs of 
clinical arthritis, such as soft-tissue swelling and body weight. Furthermore, 
markers of inflammation and joint degradation were monitored to follow the 
disease course.
RESULTS: Only 2 of 5 animals in the SCH-X-treated group displayed prominent 
soft-tissue swelling, compared with all 5 saline-treated monkeys. In addition to 
the suppression of joint inflammation, treatment with SCH-X resulted in a 
reduction in joint destruction, as demonstrated by lower rates of urinary 
excretion of collagen crosslinks, with confirmation by histology. Whereas in all 
saline-treated monkeys, marked erosion of joint cartilage was observed, this was 
absent in 4 of the 5 SCH-X-treated monkeys.
CONCLUSION: The systemic effects of treatment with SCH-X were a suppressed 
acute-phase reaction (reduction in C-reactive protein level) in the 3 treated 
monkeys with CIA that remained asymptomatic, and an altered antibody response 
toward type II collagen. The results suggest that the CCR5 antagonist SCH-X 
might have a strong clinical potential for treatment during periods of active 
inflammation, as seen in RA.
