OBJECTIVE: RNA interference is a process in which genes can be silenced 
sequence-specifically. In mammals, RNA interference can be invoked by 
introduction of small (19-21-nucleotide) double-stranded RNA molecules known as 
small interfering RNA (siRNA) into cells. Thereby, siRNA offers promise as a 
novel therapeutic modality. However, siRNA is a relatively large, highly charged 
molecule and does not readily enter cells. This study was undertaken to 
investigate the use of electroporation for in vivo transfection of siRNA into 
joint tissue in arthritic mice to achieve local RNA interference.
METHODS: Proof of principle that siRNA is able to inhibit gene expression in 
vivo in the mouse joint was studied by local injection and electroporation of 
siRNA designed to silence reporter genes. In mice with collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA), the disease-modulating activity of siRNA designed to silence 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) was investigated.
RESULTS: Luciferase activity could be reduced by >90% with luciferase-specific 
siRNA as compared with the activity measured after electroporation without siRNA 
or with irrelevant siRNA. The effect was observed only locally. In mice with 
CIA, electroporation of siRNA designed to inhibit TNFalpha strongly inhibited 
joint inflammation, whereas electroporation of irrelevant siRNA or injection of 
siRNA against TNFalpha without electroporation failed to produce therapeutic 
effects.
CONCLUSION: Local electroporation of siRNA in joint tissue can inhibit CIA in 
mice. These results offer promise for the use of siRNA as a new strategy for 
therapeutic intervention in rheumatoid arthritis and may serve as a tool to 
study arthritis disease pathways through loss-of-function phenotypes.
