Collagen-induced arthritis is a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and is 
commonly induced after immunization with type II collagen (CII) of a non-mouse 
origin. T cell recognition of heterologous CII epitopes has been shown to be 
critical in development of arthritis, as mice with cartilage-restricted 
transgenic expression of the heterologous T cell epitope (MMC mice) are 
partially tolerized to CII. However, the mechanism responsible for tolerance and 
arthritis resistance in these mice is unclear. The present study investigated 
the regulatory mechanisms in naturally occurring self-tolerance in MMC mice. We 
found that expression of heterologous rat CII sequence in the cartilage of mice 
positively selects autoreactive CD4(+) T cells with suppressive capacity. 
Although CD4(+)CD25(+) cells did not play a prominent role in this suppression, 
CD152-expressing T cells played a crucial role in this tolerance. MMC CD4(+) T 
cells were able to suppress proliferation of wild-type cells in vitro where this 
suppression required cell-to-cell contact. The suppressive capability of MMC 
cells was also demonstrated in vivo, as transfer of such cells into wild-type 
arthritis susceptible mice delayed arthritis onset. This study also determined 
that both tolerance and disease resistance were CD152-dependent as demonstrated 
by Ab treatment experiments. These findings could have relevance for RA because 
the transgenic mice used express the same CII epitope in cartilage as humans and 
because autoreactive T cells, specific for this epitope, are present in 
transgenic mice as well as in patients with RA.
