While it is well established that acute stress can produce antinociception, a 
phenomenon referred to as stress-induced analgesia, repeated exposure to stress 
can have the opposite effect. Since, chronic pain syndromes, such as 
fibromyalgia and rheumatoid arthritis, may be triggered and/or exacerbated by 
chronic stress, we have evaluated the effect of repeated stress on mechanical 
nociceptive threshold and inflammatory hyperalgesia. Using the Randall-Selitto 
paw pressure test to quantify nociceptive threshold in the rat, we found that 
repeated non-habituating sound stress enhanced the mechanical hyperalgesia 
induced by the potent inflammatory mediator, bradykinin, which, in normal rats, 
produces hyperalgesia indirectly by stimulating the release of prostaglandin E2 
from sympathetic nerve terminals. Hyperalgesia induced by the direct-acting 
inflammatory mediator, prostaglandin E2 as well as the baseline nociceptive 
threshold, were not affected. Adrenal medullectomy or denervation, reversed the 
effect of sound stress. In sound stressed animals, bradykinin-hyperalgesia had a 
more rapid latency to onset and was no longer inhibited by sympathectomy, 
compatible with a direct effect of bradykinin on primary afferent nociceptors. 
In addition, implants of epinephrine restored bradykinin-hyperalgesia in 
sympathectomized non-stressed rats, lending further support to the suggestion 
that increased plasma levels of epinephrine can sensitize primary afferents to 
bradykinin. These results suggest that stress-induced enhancement of 
inflammatory hyperalgesia is associated with a change in mechanism by which 
bradykinin induces hyperalgesia, from being sympathetically mediated to being 
sympathetically independent. This sympathetic-independent enhancement of 
mechanical hyperalgesia is mediated by the stress-induced release of epinephrine 
from the adrenal medulla.
