Therapies directed against tumour necrosis factor (TNF) are effective for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and reduce pain scores in this condition. In 
this study, we sought to explore mechanisms by which TNF contributes to 
inflammatory pain in an experimental model of arthritis. The effects of an 
anti-TNF agent, etanercept, on behavioural pain responses arising from rat 
monoarthritis induced by complete Freund's adjuvant were assessed and compared 
with expression of TNF receptors (TNFRs) by dorsal root ganglion (DRG) cells at 
corresponding time points. Etanercept had no effect on evoked pain responses in 
normal animals but exerted a differential effect on the thermal and mechanical 
hyperalgesia associated with rat arthritis induced by complete Freund's adjuvant 
(CFA). Joint inflammation was associated with increased TNFR1 and TNFR2 
expression on DRG cells, which was maintained throughout the time course of the 
model. TNFR1 expression was increased in neuronal cells of the DRG bilaterally 
after arthritis induction. In contrast, TNFR2 expression occurred exclusively on 
non-neuronal cells of the macrophage-monocyte lineage, with cell numbers 
increasing in a TNF-dependent fashion during CFA-induced arthritis. A strong 
correlation was observed between numbers of macrophages and the development of 
mechanical hyperalgesia in CFA-induced arthritis. These results highlight the 
potential for TNF to play a vital role in inflammatory hyperalgesia, both by a 
direct action on neurons via TNFR1 and by facilitating the accumulation of 
macrophages in the DRG via a TNFR2-mediated pathway.
