Rituximab, a human/mouse chimeric anti-CD20 antibody, has become part of 
standard therapy for patients with CD20-expressing B-cell lymphoma, and is 
currently under investigation for other indications including autoimmune 
diseases, in particular rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Its characteristic 
tolerability profile was established soon after clinical testing began and 
compares favourably with chemotherapy. The majority of patients experience mild 
to moderate infusion-related reactions (IRRs) during the first administration of 
rituximab, but the incidence decreases markedly with subsequent infusions. 
Current data suggest that the type of adverse events in patients with RA are 
similar to those in lymphoma, but that adverse events related to the rituximab 
infusions are less severe and less frequent. Rituximab induces a rapid depletion 
of normal CD20-expressing B-cells in the peripheral blood, and levels remain low 
or undetectable for 2-6 months before returning to pretreatment levels, 
generally within 12 months. Serum immunoglobulin levels remain largely stable, 
although a reduction in IgM has been described. T-cells are unaffected by 
rituximab and consequently opportunistic infections rarely occur in association 
with rituximab therapy. When used in combination with a variety of 
chemotherapeutic regimens, rituximab does not add to the toxicity of 
chemotherapy, with the exception of a higher rate of neutropenia. However, this 
does not translate into a higher infection rate. Over 540,000 patients worldwide 
have now received rituximab and serious adverse reactions have occurred in a 
small minority of patients, but for the great majority of patients, rituximab is 
safe and well tolerated.
