OBJECTIVE: Low-dose methotrexate (MTX), a mainstay in the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis, is effective in only 60-70% of patients, a finding 
mirrored by poor antiinflammatory efficacy in some animal models, most notably 
collagen-induced arthritis. To determine whether genetic factors or the model 
itself is responsible for the poor response to MTX, we directly compared the 
responses of 4 inbred mouse strains to MTX in the air-pouch model of acute 
inflammation.
METHODS: The exudate leukocyte count and adenosine concentration were determined 
in inbred mice treated with MTX (0.75 mg/kg intraperitoneally every week for 4 
weeks) or vehicle 4 hours after injection of carrageenan into the air pouch 
using previously described methods. Quantitative trait locus mapping was 
performed using an in silico, or computer-based, method to identify loci 
potentially associated with each phenotype.
RESULTS: MTX significantly reduced the exudate leukocyte count in C57BL/6J and 
BALB/cJ mice, but not DBA/1J (the strain used in the collagen-induced arthritis 
model) or DBA/2J mice. In a parallel manner, MTX increased adenosine 
concentration in inflammatory exudates of C57BL/6J and BALB/cJ mice, but not 
DBA/1J or DBA/2J mice. Antiinflammatory and adenosine responses to MTX in DBA/1J 
x C57BL/6J F(1) and F(2) offspring were most consistent with single genetic loci 
being responsible for each phenotype. In silico mapping identified partially 
overlapping loci containing candidate genes involved in both responses.
CONCLUSION: Genetic factors contribute to the antiinflammatory efficacy of MTX, 
and a single locus involved in MTX-induced adenosine up-regulation is likely 
responsible for the observed resistance to MTX in DBA/1J mice.
