Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is an animal model for human rheumatoid 
arthritis. CIA is induced in the mouse by immunization with collagen type II in 
complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). As a result of this immunization, mice will 
develop an autoimmune disease that is characterized by an inflammatory and 
destructive affection of the joints. IFN-gammaR KO mice have an increased 
susceptibility to CIA as compared to wild-type control animals: they developed 
arthritis with a significant earlier disease onset and a higher disease 
incidence and score. The results indicate that IFN-gamma acts as a 
disease-protective factor in CIA. The disease-protective effect of IFN-gamma in 
CIA appeared to be due to CFA that was used for the induction of CIA, and more 
precisely to the presence of killed mycobacteria in this adjuvant. The killed 
mycobacteria in CFA elicited in mice an extramedullar myelopoiesis and an 
expansion of Mac-1+ cells that was strongly inhibited by endogenous IFN-gamma. 
Parts of the expanded Mac-1+ splenocytes were precursor cells for osteoclasts, 
they migrated to the joints after challenge with SDF-1, where they found to 
differentiate into mature osteoclasts who are responsible for bone destruction. 
The mechanism of expansion, migration and osteoclast activation occurred in 
IFN-gammaR KO as well as in wild-type mice, but was much more pronounced in the 
mutant mice. Thus, the use of IFN-gammaR KO mice has exposed a new mechanism in 
the pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis in mice. These findings may have 
important clinical perspectives.
