Inflammatory diseases lead to systemic osteoporosis. Causal factors include 
increased circulating concentrations of inflammatory cytokines such as 
interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), glucocorticoid 
medication, and reduced physical activity. In addition, disturbances of vitamin 
D metabolism play an important role for the development of inflammation induced 
osteoporosis. Therefore, D-hormone analogs offer an important treatment option. 
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (D-hormone) prevented bone loss in the rat model of 
inflammation mediated osteopenia and in an arthritis model. One explanation is 
that animals and humans with inflammatory diseases exhibit markedly reduced 
circulating concentrations of D-hormone, partly the result of inhibition of 
renal 1-alpha-hydroxylase by TNF-alpha. In addition, the number of vitamin D 
receptors is reduced by glucocorticoids. Moreover, D-hormone has pleiotropic 
effects not only on calcium homoeostasis but also on muscle (improving power), 
the nervous system, and the immune system. D-hormone inhibits the release of 
cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-alpha) from macrophages and stimulates 
osteoprotegerin secretion in vitro and improves arthritis in animal models. This 
article reviews the interaction between inflammatory disease and vitamin D 
metabolism, summarizes the rationale for the therapeutic use of alfacalcidol, 
and provides recent data from controlled clinical trials comparing the effect of 
alfacalcidol versus plain vitamin D in secondary osteoporosis. Alfacalcidol, but 
not plain vitamin D, has pleiotropic effects improving bone and muscle 
metabolism and clinical symptoms in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
