Chicken type II procollagen (ccol2a1) has become as an important oral tolerance 
protein for effective treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. However, its molecular 
identity remains unclear. Here, we reported the full-length cDNA and nearly 
complete genomic DNA encoding ccol2a1. We have determined the structural 
organization, evolutional characters, developmental expression and chromosomal 
mapping of the gene. The full-length cDNA sequence spans 4837 bp containing all 
the coding region of the ccol2a1 including 3' and 5' untranslation region. The 
deduced peptide of ccol2a1, composed of 1420 amino acids, can be divided into 
signal peptide, N-propeptide, N-telopeptide, triple helix, C-telopeptide and 
C-propeptide. The ccol2a1 genomic DNA sequence was determined to be 12,523 bp 
long containing 54 exons interrupted by 53 introns. Comparison of the ccol2a1 
with its counterparts in human, mouse, canine, horse, rat, frog and newt 
revealed highly conserved sequence in the triple helix domain. Chromosomal 
mapping of ccol2a1 locates it on 4P2. While the ccol2a1 mRNA was expressed in 
multiple tissues, the protein was only detected in chondrogenic cartilage, 
vitreous body and cornea. The ccol2a1 was found to contain two isoforms detected 
by RT-PCR. The distribution of the ccol2a1 lacking exon 2wasfrequently detected 
in chondrogenic tissues, whereas the exon 2-containing isoform was more abundant 
in non-chondrogenic tissues. These results provide useful information for 
preparing recombinant chicken type II collagen and for a better understanding of 
normal cartilage development.
