OBJECTIVE: To examine the apoptosis-inducing effect of apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1) gene transfer into synovial cells in vitro and 
in vivo.
METHODS: An adenovirus vector was constructed so that a constitutively active 
form of ASK1 gene (ASK1DeltaN) was expressed in the presence of the Cre 
recombinase. The ASK1DeltaN and Cre adenovirus vectors were cotransduced into 
cultured synoviocytes derived from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and 
apoptosis was evaluated by TUNEL and Hoechst staining. Collagen induced 
arthritis (CIA) was induced in 8-week-old male DA rats, and 10 days later the 2 
adenovirus vectors were coadministered into the ankle joints of the animals. As 
indicators of severity of arthritis, swelling of the ankle and articular index 
(AI) scores were evaluated, while histopathological observation of articular 
tissue was also performed.
RESULTS: In the cultured human RA synoviocytes, overexpression of the ASK1DeltaN 
significantly reduced cell viability and induced apoptosis. In the CIA rats 
transduced with the ASK1DeltaN gene, arthritis was significantly promoted in 
terms of the swelling of the ankle joints and elevation of the AI scores. 
Histopathological observation also revealed that the constitutively active ASK1 
induced massive infiltration of inflammatory cells into the synovial membrane as 
well as proliferation of synovial fibroblasts. Degeneration of the synovial 
membrane was not evident.
CONCLUSION: Adenoviral transduction of ASK1DeltaN induced apoptosis in RA 
synoviocytes in vitro, but not in CIA synovium in vivo.
