In China, the ethylacetate extract of the herb Tripterygium wilfordii Hook f 
(TWEE), containing the major active ingredient triptolide, is often used with 
favorable effect on rheumatoid arthritis patients, in alternation with the use 
of prednisone. The mechanism of this therapeutic effect, however, has not been 
completely delineated. In this study, we studied how TWEE and prednisone affect 
the pituitary and adrenal glands in rats. Thirty normal male Sprague-Dawley rats 
(ten per group) were randomly assigned to receive: (1) TWEE (25 mg/kg, twice a 
day), (2) prednisone (2 mg/kg, twice a day), or (3) vehicle (control) (0.5% 
sodium carboxymethyl cellulose 1 ml, twice a day), orally for 30 days. Pituitary 
and trunk blood were collected on day 31. Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
expression in the pituitary gland was assessed morphologically by 
immunohistochemical techniques. Plasma ACTH concentrations and serum 
corticosterone concentrations were quantitatively measured by radioimmunoassay. 
We found that TWEE significantly increased plasma ACTH concentration and serum 
corticosterone concentration and dramatically increased the number of 
ACTH-positive cells in the pituitary. Our findings indicate that TWEE can 
promote the synthesis and secretion of ACTH cells--in the pars distalis of the 
rat pituitary gland and the production of corticosterone in the zone fasciculata 
of the adrenal cortex. Our results indicate that TWEE has a cortical 
hormone-like function and can promote adrenal cortex function by activating the 
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis.
