Triptolide is a purified component from a traditional Chinese herb Tripterygium 
wilfordii Hook F. It has been shown to have anti-inflammatory and 
immunosuppressive activities by its inhibitory effect on T cells. But the effect 
of triptolide on Peyer's patch cells is unknown. Enteric mucosal immune system, 
including Peyer's patch, is regarded as one of the sites for inducing immunity 
tolerance, and this intolerance effect has been used to induce oral tolerance 
which can considerably reduce arthritis severity in several models of 
experimental polyarthritis and RA patients. In this study, we investigated the 
effect of triptolide on the Peyer's patch cells and peripheral lymphocytes in 
collagen induced arthritis (CIA) in rats. CIA in rat is a widely studied animal 
model of inflammatory polyarthritis with similarities to rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). Our data show that triptolide could lower the arthritic scores and delay 
the onset of CIA. There are more Peyer's patches in triptolide treated rats than 
in control rats, while there is no difference in Peyer's patch numbers between 
CIA rats and triptolide treated rats. In the Peyer's patch, more CD4+ cells are 
observed in CIA rats, and the numbers of CD4+ cells in triptolide treated rats 
and control rats are similar. While more CD8+ cells are observed in triptolide 
treated rats, and the numbers of CD8+ cells in CIA rats and control rats are 
similar. In periphery, more CD4+ cells and less CD4+ cells in CIA rats and 
triptolide treated rats are respectively observed. Therefore, the regulation on 
Peyer's patch might explain some of the immunosuppressive activities of 
triptolide, and enteric immune response might be actively involved in CIA 
pathogenesis. It is suggested that the Peyer's patch is one of the primary 
targets of the immunosuppressive activity of triptolide.
