CD166 is an Ig superfamily molecule that binds homotypically to itself and 
heterotypically to CD6. Interactions between CD6 and CD166 are important during 
immune development and in alloreactivity. CD166 is expressed at increased levels 
in selected cancers and in rheumatoid arthritis synovium. Knowledge that CD166 
was expressed in normal human salivary epithelium led to these studies of CD166 
and CD6 in diseased mouse salivary glands, that resemble pathology seen in the 
human disease, Sjögren's syndrome. We showed that in mouse salivary epithelium 
CD166 was expressed but that expression of CD166 did not necessarily predict its 
function. Recombinant soluble CD6-Ig bound to CD6 ligands (CD6L) on transformed 
and freshly isolated salivary epithelial cells. Cross-blocking studies showed 
that binding of CD6-Ig to salivary epithelium was in part dependent on CD166, 
but that CD6-Ig binding may also involve additional CD6L. Binding of CD6-Ig was 
sensitive to trypsin digestion but resistant to digestion by collagenase and 
sialidase. Anti-CD166 ab precipitated CD166 from salivary epithelium pre- and 
post-treatment with the pro-inflammatory cytokine IFN-gamma. In contrast CD6-Ig 
only precipitated CD166 from IFN-gamma treated cells. More extensive 
colocalization between CD166 and the actin cytoskeleton was observed in 
sialoadenitis epithelium compared to control. We conclude that during 
sialoadenitis, CD166 undergoes a gain of function, resulting in closer 
association with the actin cytoskeleton and increased capacity to bind CD6. We 
suggest that altered CD166 function may contribute to the pro-inflammatory 
milieu during sialoadenitis seen in Sjögren's syndrome.
