Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic debilitating autoimmune disease that 
results in joint destruction and subsequent loss of function. To better 
understand its pathogenesis and to facilitate the search for novel RA 
therapeutics, we profiled the rat model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) to 
discover and characterize blood biomarkers for RA. Peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs) were purified using a Ficoll gradient at various time points after 
type II collagen immunization for RNA preparation. Total RNA was processed for a 
microarray analysis using Affymetrix GeneChip technology. Statistical comparison 
analyses identified differentially expressed genes that distinguished CIA from 
control rats. Clustering analyses indicated that gene expression patterns 
correlated with laboratory indices of disease progression. A set of 28 probe 
sets showed significant differences in expression between blood from arthritic 
rats and that from controls at the earliest time after induction, and the 
difference persisted for the entire time course. Gene Ontology comparison of the 
present study with previous published murine microarray studies showed conserved 
Biological Processes during disease induction between the local joint and PBMC 
responses. Genes known to be involved in autoimmune response and arthritis, such 
as those encoding Galectin-3, Versican, and Socs3, were identified and validated 
by quantitative TaqMan RT-PCR analysis using independent blood samples. Finally, 
immunoblot analysis confirmed that Galectin-3 was secreted over time in plasma 
as well as in supernatant of cultured tissue synoviocytes of the arthritic rats, 
which is consistent with disease progression. Our data indicate that gene 
expression in PBMCs from the CIA model can be utilized to identify candidate 
blood biomarkers for RA.
