BACKGROUND: Leukocyte recruitment across blood vessels is fundamental to immune 
surveillance and inflammation. Lymphocyte homing to peripheral lymph nodes is 
mediated by the adhesion molecule, L-selectin, which binds to sulfated 
carbohydrate ligands on high endothelial venules (HEV). These glycoprotein 
ligands are collectively known as peripheral node addressin (PNAd), as defined 
by the function-blocking monoclonal antibody known as MECA-79. The sulfation of 
these ligands depends on the action of two HEV-expressed N-acetylglucosamine 
6-O-sulfotransferases: GlcNAc6ST-2 and to a lesser degree GlcNAc6ST-1. Induction 
of PNAd has also been shown to occur in a number of human inflammatory diseases 
including rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
RESULTS: In order to identify an animal model suitable for investigating the 
role of PNAd in chronic inflammation, we examined the expression of PNAd as well 
as GlcNAc6ST-1 and -2 in collagen-induced arthritis in mice. Here we show that 
PNAd is expressed in the vasculature of arthritic synovium in mice immunized 
with collagen but not in the normal synovium of control animals. This de novo 
expression of PNAd correlates strongly with induction of transcripts for both 
GlcNAc6ST-1 and GlcNAc6ST-2, as well as the expression of GlcNAc6ST-2 protein.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that PNAd and the sulfotransferases 
GlcNAc6ST-1 and 2 are induced in mouse collagen-induced arthritis and suggest 
that PNAd antagonists or inhibitors of the enzymes may have therapeutic benefit 
in this widely-used mouse model of RA.
