Interferon (IFN)-beta has significant immunomodulatory properties and has 
received much interest as a potentially therapeutic agent for rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Systemic IFN-beta treatment of patients with RA was not 
effective, probably because of pharmacokinetic issues. Therefore, we studied the 
effect of local IFN-beta production by adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to the 
ankle joints of arthritic rats. Adjuvant arthritis (AA) in rats was used as a 
model to study intraarticular gene therapy with an adenoviral vector encoding 
the rat IFN-beta gene (Ad.IFN-beta). The effect on paw swelling was measured by 
water displacement plethysmometry. Synovial tissue of the hind paws was examined 
by immunohistochemistry. Bone destruction was analyzed on the basis of 
radiographs. In addition, quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was 
used to assess IFN-beta expression. Levels of IFN-beta mRNA and protein peaked 2 
days after intraarticular injection and declined thereafter. Local delivery of 
Ad.IFN-beta after the onset of disease reduced paw swelling significantly. This 
was accompanied by a reduction in synovial inflammation. The clinical effects in 
rat AA lasted up to 9 days. Strikingly, Ad.IFN-beta treatment protected bone 
from erosion, reduced levels of c-Cbl and Cbl-b (both signaling molecules 
essential for osteoclast activity), and reduced the matrix 
metalloproteinase-3:tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 ratio in the joint. 
Immunohistochemical analysis of the synovial tissue revealed a clear shift 
toward a more antiinflammatory cytokine profile. Local overexpression of 
IFN-beta inhibits arthritis progression and protects against bone destruction in 
rat AA. These findings validate IFN-beta as a therapeutic molecule for 
intraarticular gene therapy of arthritis.
