Because of high sequence homology between microbial and endogenous heat shock 
proteins (HSP), immunological cross-reactivity to microbial HSP has been 
suggested as a possible cause of the development of autoimmune diseases, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis. The present study aimed to determine a potential role of 
HSP47, a molecular chaperone involved in the synthesis and assembly of collagen 
molecules, and microbial HSP71 (mHSP71) in adjuvant arthritis (AA) in two rat 
strains: Dark Agouti (DA), susceptible to AA induction and Albino Oxford (AO), 
which is resistant to AA induction. Immunization with complete Freund's adjuvant 
(CFA) induced an increased expression of HSP47 in joints of DA rats, which 
exhibited severe clinical signs of AA at the time of disease peak, while this 
protein was not detectable in joints of AO rats. In contrast, no strain 
differences in HSP72 (rat analogue of mHSP71) expressions in joints were 
observed. The increased levels of anti-HSP47 antibodies were detected in sera of 
DA rats during the AA peak, while the immunization with CFA increased levels of 
anti-mHSP71 antibodies in sera of AO rats. HSP47 and mHSP71 reduced 
proliferation of draining inguinal lymph node cells (LNC) in resistant AO rat 
strain, leading to a hypothesis that both HSP participated in AA control. 
Finally, mHSP71 potentiated the apoptotic response of LNC in susceptible DA rat 
strain. In conclusion, our findings indicate involvement of HSP47 in the 
development of AA in the rat, and point out to the regulatory role for both 
HSP47 and mHSP71.
