OBJECTIVES: Lipoxygenases (EC 1.13.11.12, LOX) catalyze the hydroperoxidation of 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). This reaction leads to the production of 
conjugated hydro peroxide dienes of PUFA. In animals, LOX generate leukotriens 
(LT) and lipoxins, which belong to inflammatory mediators. It is believed that 
restricting LT synthesis by inhibition of LOX would have therapeutic utility for 
the treatment of a variety of inflammatory conditions (e.g. asthma, rheumatoid 
arthritis, psoriasis).
METHODS & RESULTS: The process of production and elimination of radical 
intermediates in vitro can be monitored by determination of LOX activity. We 
assessed the concentration of PUFA hydroperoxides in our system with 
LOX-catalyzed enzyme reaction spectrophotometrically. The inhibition of LOX 
activity (LOX from cytosol fraction of rat lungs) with selected 
N-salicylideneaminoalkanoatocopper(II) complexes was tested. In our experiments, 
all compounds tested showed an inhibitory effect on LOX catalyzed 
hydroperoxidation of PUFA. Cu(II) (from CuSO(4).5H(2)O dilution) ions also 
inhibited this enzyme reaction, but all compounds studied had a 10 times higher 
anti-LOX activity. The most effective of these complexes was monohydrate 
aqua-(N-salicylidene-L-a-alaninato)copper(II) complex 
[Cu(sal-L-alpha-ala)(H(2)O)].H(2)O with IC(50) 1.86 x 10(-4) mol/l.
CONCLUSIONS: These complexes are known for their anti-phlogistic and 
radioprotective properties and they can be classified as potential anti-radical 
compounds. The structure of these complexes is similar to the active site of 
Cu,Zn-SOD (superoxide dismutase) and superoxide radical scavenger activity of 
these complexes is known. We found that these copper complexes were capable to 
inhibit LOX activity, which may be related with their anti-radical properties.
