There is extensive evidence for the critical role of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) produced by phagocytes in development of 
inflammatory processes and pathogenesis of numerous diseases, including 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Apart from their function as mediators of 
inflammation and tissue damage, recent research supports their role as signaling 
and regulatory molecules. In the present study we have investigated the 
production of ROS and NO over the course of adjuvant arthritis (AA) and 
oil-induced arthritis (OIA), by resident peritoneal macrophages of two rat 
strains: Dark Agouti (DA), susceptible, and Albino Oxford (AO), resistant to 
induction of AA and OIA. We have compared levels of ROS and NO produced by 
susceptible vs. resistant rat strain, and investigated their relevancy for 
arthritis development and severity. In addition, we have stimulated macrophages 
in vitro with Mycobacterium bovis BCG, and two heat shock proteins (HSP): 
endogenous HSP47 and mycobacterial HSP71 (mHSP71). Our results suggest a 
possible contribution of increased ROS production to arthritis resistance of AO 
rats. The ROS production in AO rats is potentiated by endogenous HSP47, but not 
with mycobacterial cell and mHSP71, suggesting HSP47 participates in AA control. 
We have found no fundamental relationship between the magnitude of NO production 
and AA and OIA susceptibility and severity, suggesting that NO has no effector 
role in AA and OIA. Our results advocate a regulatory type action of NO molecule 
might be more significant in arthritis development.
