Celecoxib is a selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor used in the 
treatment of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis with fewer gastrointestinal 
toxicities compared to traditional non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. 
Voltage-gated Na(+) channels in primary sensory neurons play an important role 
in the pathogenesis of various pain conditions. We examined the effects of 
celecoxib on tetrodotoxin-sensitive (TTX-S) and tetrodotoxin-resistant (TTX-R) 
Na(+) currents in acutely dissociated rat dorsal root ganglion neurons. 
Celecoxib suppressed both currents in dose- and frequency-dependent manner. The 
apparent dissociation constants (K(d)) for TTX-S and TTX-R Na(+) currents 
measured at 0 mV from a holding potential of -80 mV were estimated to be 5.6 and 
19.5 microM, respectively. Celecoxib slightly slowed inactivation kinetics of 
TTX-S Na(+) current, but made it much faster in TTX-R Na(+) current. Celecoxib 
shifted the activation voltage of TTX-S Na(+) current to a depolarizing 
direction, but not that of TTX-R Na(+) current. Celecoxib caused a 
hyperpolarizing shift of the steady-state inactivation curve in both Na(+) 
currents to a great extent. In addition celecoxib reduced the maximal 
availability of both Na(+) channels. Thus celecoxib appears to bind to both 
inactivated and resting Na(+) channels. Celecoxib slowed the recovery of both 
Na(+) channels from inactivation. All these effects combined would suppress the 
excitability of sensory neurons. Thus, beside COX-2 inhibition, the Na(+) 
channel inhibition is considered to contribute to celecoxib analgesia.
