Chelidonium majus L. has multiple applications in Korean traditional medicine 
because of its anti-tumoral, cytotoxic, anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial 
activities and has long been known to have anti-inflammatory effects. However, 
no study on the anti-arthritic activity of Chelidonium majus has been reported 
in vivo. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease with chronic 
inflammation characterized by hyperplasia of synovial cells in affected joints, 
which ultimately leads to the destruction of cartilage and bone. Cytokine 
production and gene expression were assessed during CIA (collagen-induced 
arthritis) model mice in knee joint, lymph node (LN), and spleen, using ELISA 
and competitive RT-PCR. DBA/1J mice were immunized with bovine type II collagen. 
After a second collagen immunization, mice were treated with CME orally at 400, 
40mg/kg once a day for 4 weeks. The severity of arthritis within the knee joints 
was evaluated by histological assessment of cartilage destruction and pannus 
formation. Administration of CME significantly suppressed the progression of CIA 
and inhibited the production of TNF-alpha and IL-6 in spleen and lymph node. The 
erosion of cartilage was dramatically reduced in mouse knees after treatment 
with CME. In conclusion, our results demonstrates that CME significantly 
suppressed the progression of CIA and that this action was characterized by the 
decreased production of TNF-alpha, IL-6, IFN-gamma, B cells, gammadelta T cells 
(in spleen) and increased proportion of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in vivo. In 
the serum of CME-treated mice, the levels of IgG and IgM RA factor were 
decreased.
