The results of trials in which autoantigens have been fed to individuals 
affected by autoimmune diseases - multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis and 
type 1 diabetes - have been disappointing in terms of clinical improvement. This 
is in striking contrast to the results in experimental rodent models of these 
diseases. The outcome of the recent DPT-1 trial testing oral insulin in 
individuals at risk of type 1 diabetes was also disappointing, in contrast to 
the effects of oral insulin in the non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse model of type 
1 diabetes. However, it is premature to conclude that mucosal tolerance works 
only in in-bred rodents and not in humans with autoimmune disease. Except for 
oral insulin in DPT-1, the human trials were performed in individuals with 
end-stage disease when this form of immune regulation might not be expected to 
be effective. Importantly, in no trial was an immune response to the autoantigen 
documented, to demonstrate that the dose was at least bioavailable. Furthermore, 
mucosal autoantigen administration is a 'double-edged sword' and in rodents can 
lead not only to regulatory and protective immunity but also to pathogenic, 
tissue-destructive immunity and exacerbation of autoimmune disease. When 
suppression of autoimmune disease is observed it may be because autoantigen was 
administered under conditions which minimize induction of pathogenic immunity. 
Thus, clinical protocols for mucosal autoantigen administration may need to be 
modified to favor induction of regulatory immunity. In this short review, we 
discuss recent studies in autoimmune diabetes-prone NOD mice indicating that 
with novel modifications mucosal autoantigen administration could be harnessed 
to prevent type 1 diabetes in humans.
