The incidence and severity of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are reduced during 
pregnancy. Estradiol-17beta and relaxin (RLX), hormones of pregnancy, are 
implicated in decreased immune responsiveness. The aim of this study was to 
determine the effects of estrogen and RLX, alone or in combination, on the 
development of adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in ovariectomized (OVX) Lewis 
rats. Arthritis was induced on day 0 by adjuvant injection in the left hind paw. 
Rats were treated with estradiol valerate (E), porcine RLX, E + RLX, or vehicle. 
Healthy OVX control animals were used for comparison. Treatment with RLX or E 
alone decreased adjuvant-induced inflammation in both the injected (primary) and 
noninjected (secondary) hind paws. Combined treatment with E and RLX was more 
effective than either hormone alone in blocking secondary paw inflammation. 
Furthermore, E plus RLX reduced changes to spleen and thymus weights induced by 
adjuvant injection. Both E and RLX alone decreased circulating tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF) alpha. The combination of E and RLX resulted in a greater decline 
in TNFalpha than treatment with either hormone alone. There was no effect of 
hormones on the proinflammatory cytokine, interleukin (IL)-1beta. The 
anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 increased in response to E and E plus RLX. In 
conclusion, combined therapy with E and RLX was more effective than either 
hormone alone in reducing chronic inflammation, joint changes, and high 
circulating TNFalpha associated with AIA in rats. Accordingly, these hormones 
could play a role in reducing RA-induced inflammation during pregnancy by an 
effect on the immune system.
