Rheumatoid arthritis is a systemic autoimmune disease. B cells are likely to 
play a critical role in arthritis pathogenesis, although it is unclear whether 
they are necessary for disease induction, autoantibody production, or disease 
progression. To assess the role of B cells in inflammatory arthritis, B cells 
were depleted using mouse anti-mouse CD20 mAbs in a mouse model of 
collagen-induced arthritis. CD20 mAbs effectively depleted mature B cells from 
adult DBA-1 mice. When B cells were depleted using CD20 mAbs before collagen 
immunization, there was a delay in disease onset and autoantibody production, 
with significantly diminished severity of arthritis both clinically and 
histologically. B cell depletion further delayed disease onset if initiated 
before, as well as after, collagen immunization. However, in both cases, the 
eventual reappearance of peripheral B cells triggered autoantibody production 
and the subsequent development of arthritis in collagen-sensitized mice. By 
contrast, B cell depletion after collagen immunizations did not have a 
significant effect on arthritis progression or severity. Thus, disease symptoms 
were only induced when peripheral B cells and their autoantibody products were 
present in collagen-immunized mice, documenting a critical role for B cells 
during the elicitation phase of collagen-induced arthritis. These studies 
suggest that B cell depletion strategies will be most effective when initiated 
early in the development of inflammatory arthritis, with sustained B cell 
depletion required to inhibit the production of isotype-switched pathogenic Abs 
and the evolution of joint inflammation and destruction.
