DPC 333 ((2R)-2-((3R)-3-amino-3{4-[2-methyl-4-quinolinyl) methoxy] 
phenyl}-2-oxopyrrolidinyl)-N-hydroxy-4-methylpentanamide)) is a potent and 
selective inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha-converting enzyme 
(TACE). It significantly inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced soluble TNF-alpha 
production in blood from rodents, chimpanzee, and human, with IC(50) values 
ranging from 17 to 100 nM. In rodent models of endotoxemia, DPC 333 inhibited 
the production of TNF-alpha in a dose-dependent manner, with an oral ED(50) 
ranging from 1.1 to 6.1 mg/kg. Oral dosing of DPC 333 at 5.5 mg/kg daily for 2 
weeks in a rat collagen antibody-induced arthritis model suppressed the maximal 
response by approximately 50%. DPC 333 was distributed widely to tissues 
including the synovium, the site of action for antiarthritic drugs. 
Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic studies in chimpanzee revealed a systemic 
clearance of 0.4 l/h/kg, a V(ss) of 0.6 l/kg, an oral bioavailability of 17%, 
and an ex vivo IC(50) for the suppression of TNF-alpha production of 55 nM (n = 
1). In a phase I clinical trial with male volunteers after single escalating 
doses of oral DPC 333, the terminal half-life was between 3 and 6 h and the ex 
vivo IC(50) for suppressing TNF-alpha production was 113 nM. Measurement of the 
suppression of TNF-alpha production ex vivo may serve as a good biomarker in 
evaluating the therapeutic efficacy of TACE inhibitors. Overall, the 
pharmacological profiles of DPC 333 support the notion that suppression of 
TNF-alpha with TACE inhibitors like DPC 333 may provide a novel approach in the 
treatment of various inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, via 
control of excessive TNF-alpha production.
