Rheumatoid arthritis, a debilitating, systemic inflammatory joint disease, is 
likely accompanied by alterations in circulating metabolites. Here, an 1H NMR 
spectroscopy-based metabolomics approach was developed to establish a metabolic 
'biomarker pattern' in a model of rheumatoid arthritis, the K/BxN transgenic 
mouse. Sera obtained from arthritic K/BxN mice (N = 15) and a control population 
(N = 19) having the same genetic background, but lacking the arthritogenic 
T-cell receptor KRN transgene, were compared by 1H NMR spectroscopy. A unique 
method was developed by combining technologies such as ultrafiltration to remove 
proteins from serum samples, quantitative 'targeted profiling' of known 
metabolites, pseudo-quantitative profiling of unknown resonances, a supervised 
O-PLS-DA pattern recognition analysis, and a metabolic-pathway based network 
analysis for interpretation of results. In total, 88 spectral features were 
profiled (59 metabolites and 28 unknown resonances). A highly significant subset 
of 18 spectral features (15 known compounds and 3 unknown resonances) was 
identified (p = 0.00075 using MANOVA) that we term a 'metabolic bioprofile'. We 
identified metabolites relating to nucleic acid, amino acid, and fatty acid 
metabolism, as well as lipolysis, reactive oxygen species generation, and 
methylation. Pathway analysis suggested a shift from metabolites involved in 
numerous reactions (hub-metabolites) toward intermediates and metabolic 
endpoints associated with arthritis. The results attest to the metabolic 
complexity of systemic inflammation and to the power of the experimental 
approach for identifying a wide variety of disease-associated marker candidates. 
The diagnostic and prognostic implications of monitoring a spectrum of metabolic 
events simultaneously using serum samples is discussed with respect to the 
potential for individualized medicine.
