In the present study, azothioprine, chloroquine, D-penicillamine, methotrexate 
and sodium aurothiomalate (gold salt) were evaluated for possible 
disease-modifying effects in the adjuvant-induced arthritis model of human 
rheumatoid arthritis in rats. Gait analysis was used to examine the role of 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs in the development of pain. Body weights 
were also measured to monitor the progression of disease and the systemic 
antiarthritic effects of the test compounds used in this study, as well as their 
systemic toxicity. Our results showed that azothioprine (5 mg/kg/day), 
chloroquine (12.5 mg/kg/day), sodium aurothiomalate (2.5 mg/kg/day) and 
methotrexate (1 mg/kg/week) not only inhibited the macroscopic changes such as 
erythema and swelling of limbs, but also exhibited significant reversal of gait 
deficits seen in the untreated or saline-treated arthritic rats. No reduction in 
the body weights were observed in the arthritic rats treated with azothioprine, 
chloroquine, sodium aurothiomalate and methotrexate. D-Penicillamine (12.5 
mg/kg/day), however, showed a significant reduction (P < 0.03) in the body 
weights of the arthritic rats over a period of 22 days; furthermore, it was 
unable to show any reduction in arthritic score (P < 0.1). In earlier 
experiments, chloroquine and methotrexate failed to suppress carageenan-induced 
edema, suggesting that the mode of antiarthritic action may be different from 
those of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents. Since these disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs are reported to have an immunomodulatory role, especially 
the gold salt, which influences the monocyte-macrophage system, it is suggested 
that the observed antiarthritic effects of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs 
may be partly attributed to their immunomodulatory activity.
