Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) plays an important role in angiogenesis, cell 
proliferation, antifibrosis, and antiapoptosis. Moreover, recent studies have 
highlighted the immunosuppressive effect of HGF in animal models of allogenic 
heart transplantation and autoimmune myocarditis and in studies in vitro as 
well. We also reported that HGF significantly suppresses dendritic cell 
function, thus down-regulating Ag-induced Th1-type and Th2-type immune responses 
in allergic airway inflammation. However, the immunosuppressive effect of HGF in 
many other situations has not been fully clarified. In the present study, using 
a mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and experiments in vitro, we 
examined the effect of HGF on autoimmune arthritis and then elucidated the 
mechanisms of action of HGF. To achieve sufficient delivery of HGF, we used 
biodegradable gelatin hydrogels as a carrier. HGF suppressed Ag-induced T cell 
priming by regulating the functions of dendritic cells in the Ag-sensitization 
phase with down-regulation of IL-10. In contrast, under continuous Ag 
stimulation HGF induced IL-10-producing immunocytes both in vivo and in vitro. 
Moreover, HGF potently inhibited the development of CIA with enhancing the 
Th2-type immune response. We also confirmed that HGF significantly suppressed 
the production of IL-17 by immunocytes. These results indicate that HGF 
suppresses the development of CIA through different ways at different phases. 
They also suggest that HGF could be an attractive tool for treating patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis.
