Diabetic retinopathy involves an inflammatory response in the retina 
characterized by an increase in inflammatory cytokines and activation of 
microglia. The degree of microglia activation may influence the extent of retina 
injury following an inflammatory stimulus. Cytokines, released by activated 
microglia, regulate the influx of inflammatory cells to the damaged area. Thus, 
therapeutic strategy to reduce cytokine expression in microglia would be 
neuroprotective. Sinomenine, an alkaloid isolated from the stem and root of 
Sinomenium acutum, has long been recognized as an anti-inflammatory drug for 
rheumatoid arthritis and also inhibits macrophage activation. In this study, we 
activated retinal microglia in culture with advanced glycation end products 
(AGEs) treatment and attempted to determine whether sinomenine could reduce the 
production of cytokines from the activated microglia at both gene and protein 
levels. Changes in inflammatory cytokines, TNF alpha, IL-1 beta and IL-6, were 
measured by semi-quantitative RT-PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) both in the presence and absence of AGEs. The effect of sinomenine on 
levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the nuclear translocation of NF-kB 
p65 were studied with a laser confocal scanning microscope. AGEs treatment 
induced a significant release of TNF alpha, IL-1 beta, and IL-6 from retinal 
microglia. Sinomenine could inhibit release of these cytokines. Sinomenine 
attenuated ROS production in a dose-dependent fashion and reduced the nuclear 
translocation of NF-kB p65 in AGEs-activated retinal microglia in culture.
