Etodolac, a highly lipophilic anti-inflammatory drug, is widely used in 
rheumatoid arthritis usually at an oral dose of 200 mg twice daily. The 
commonest side effects during therapy with etodolac is generally 
gastrointestinal disturbances these are usually mild and reversible but in some 
patients are peptic ulcer and severe gastrointestinal bleeding. To eliminate 
these side effects and obtain high drug concentration at the application side, 
dermal application of etodolac seems to be an ideal route for administration. 
Hydrophilic gel formulations of etodolac were prepared with 
carboxymethylcellulose sodium. The effect of different terpenes (anethole, 
carvacrol, and menthol) as an enhancer on the percutaneous absorption of 
etodolac was also investigated. Permeation studies were carried out with 
unjacketed modified horizontal diffusion cells through cellulose membrane and 
rat skin. In vitro studies with cellulose membrane showed that all formulations 
presented the same drug release profile (p > 0.05). Ex vivo studies with excised 
rat skin revealed that etodolac was released and penetrated into rat skin 
quickly. Anethole, a hydrophobic terpene, enhanced the absorption of etodolac 
significantly (p < 0.05). This result is consistent with the fact that 
hydrophobic terpenes are effective on the percutaneous absorption of lipophilic 
drugs. Menthol and carvacrol, hydrophilic terpenes, did not enhance the 
absorption of etodolac. The lipophilicity of the enhancers seems an important 
factor in promoting penetration of etodolac through the skin. Since etodolac 
creates gastrointestinal disturbances, topical formulations of etodolac in gel 
form including 1% anethole could be an alternative.
