Fissistigma oldhamii (Hemsl.) Merr [F. oldhamii], a traditional Chinese herb 
medicine, is widely used for treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in China. 
Following bioactivity-guided isolation, a representative immunosuppressive 
compound with low cytotoxicity, 
7'-(3',4'-dihydroxyphenyl)-N-[(4-methoxyphenyl)ethyl]propenamide (Z23), was been 
identified in this herb medicine. We investigated the immunosuppressive effects 
of Z23 on T cells in vitro and in vivo. The results showed that Z23 in a 
dose-dependent manner significantly inhibited the proliferation of splenocytes 
induced by concanavalin A (ConA) and by the mixed lymphocyte culture reaction 
(MLR), with half inhibitive concentration (IC(50)) values of 6.22 microM and 
0.78 microM, respectively. Z23 also dose-dependently inhibited the proliferation 
and type 1 cytokine (IFN-gamma and IL-2) production of primary T cells 
stimulated by anti-CD3/CD28 mAbs, but did not affect IL-12 production by mouse 
peritoneal macrophages (pMphi) stimulated with LPS plus IFN-gamma in vitro. 
Administration of Z23 (6.25 mg/kg, 12.5 mg/kg, 25 mg/kg, i.p.) dose-dependently 
suppressed 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB)-induced delayed-type hypersensitivity 
(DTH) reactions. Furthermore, administration of Z23 (25 mg/kg, i.p.) 
significantly reduced the incidence and severity of type II bovine collagen 
(CII)-induced arthritis (CIA), which was associated with the inhibition of 
CII-specific T cell proliferation and type 1 cytokine (IFN-gamma and IL-2) 
production. In this study, we report that a representative immunosuppressive 
compound from F. oldhamii, Z23, effectively inhibits murine immune responses in 
vitro and in vivo, and that the immunosuppressive effects of Z23 might be 
attributed to suppression of T cell activation and function and Th1 type 
cytokine production.
