OBJECTIVES: To assess the human complement inhibitor C4b-binding protein (C4BP) 
for treatment of arthritis.
METHODS: We have used two mouse models of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) to assess 
the therapeutic effect of C4BP on different phases of arthritis, the collagen 
antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA), an acute antibody-induced disease and the 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), which carries the full complexity of 
arthritis.
RESULTS: Purified human C4BP injected intraperitoneally alleviated CAIA 
significantly in a manner similar to cobra venom factor that depletes complement 
due to massive activation. Furthermore, C4BP was injected before and after the 
disease development into CIA mice. In the former case, the disease onset was 
delayed and in the latter, the severity of the disease was reduced in animals 
treated with C4BP. However, C4BP did not affect the anti-CII antibody synthesis. 
C4BP present in mouse sera decreased activity of the classical but not the 
alternative pathway of the complement system when these were assessed in a fluid 
phase. However, C4BP was efficiently inhibiting the alternative pathway when 
present on the activating surface. Taken together, the disease ameliorating 
effect of C4BP appears to be related to inhibition of both pathways of 
complement.
CONCLUSIONS: Although human C4BP was cleared relatively fast from the 
circulation and was only moderately affecting complement activity, its effect on 
the disease severity was substantial, suggesting that minor alterations in 
complement activity can have significant therapeutic value in RA.
