Previous evidence has implicated E prostanoid receptor 4 (EP4) in mechanical 
hyperalgesia induced by subplantar inflammation. However, its role in chronic 
arthritis remains to be further defined because previous attempts have generated 
two conflicting lines of evidence, with one showing a marked reduction of 
arthritis induced by a collagen antibody in mice lacking EP4, but not EP1-EP3, 
and the other showing no impact of EP4 antagonism on arthritis induced by 
collagen. Here, we assessed the effect of a novel and selective EP4 antagonist 
MF498 
[N-{[4-(5,9-diethoxy-6-oxo-6,8-dihydro-7H-pyrrolo[3,4-g]quinolin-7-yl)-3-methylbenzyl]sulfonyl}-2-(2-methoxyphenyl)acetamide] 
on inflammation in adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA), a rat model for rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), and joint pain in a guinea pig model of iodoacetate-induced 
osteoarthritis (OA). In the AIA model, MF498, but not the antagonist for EP1, 
MF266-1 
[1-(5-{3-[2-(benzyloxy)-5-chlorophenyl]-2-thienyl}pyridin-3-yl)-2,2,2-trifluoroethane-1,1-diol] 
or EP3 MF266-3 
[(2E)-N-[(5-bromo-2-methoxyphenyl)sulfonyl]-3-[5-chloro-2-(2-naphthylmethyl)phenyl]acrylamide], 
inhibited inflammation, with a similar efficacy as a selective cyclooxygenase 2 
(COX-2) inhibitor MF-tricyclic. In addition, MF498 was as effective as an 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, diclofenac, or a selective microsomal 
prostaglandin E synthase-1 inhibitor, MF63 
[2-(6-chloro-1H-phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazol-2-yl)isophthalonitrile], in relieving 
OA-like pain in guinea pigs. When tested in rat models of gastrointestinal 
toxicity, the EP4 antagonist was well tolerated, causing no mucosal leakage or 
erosions. Lastly, we evaluated the renal effect of MF498 in a furosemide-induced 
diuresis model and demonstrated that the compound displayed a similar renal 
effect as MF-tricyclic 
[3-(3,4-difluorophenyl)-4-(4-(methylsulfonyl)phenyl)-2-(5H)-furanone], reducing 
furosemide-induced natriuresis by approximately 50%. These results not only 
suggest that EP4 is the major EP receptor in both RA and OA but also provide a 
proof of principle to the concept that antagonism of EP4 may be useful for 
treatment of arthritis.
