This study was done to assess the effects of Urtica dioica, Plantago major and 
Hypericum perforatum L herbal mixture in the MCIA rat model. In addition, a new 
pathological and clinical arthritis lesion assessment was developed. 
Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were immunized with bovine type II collagen and muramyl 
dipeptide (MDP). Commercial herbal extracts were administered daily to the rats 
after the immunization for the course of experiment (90 days). Rats were boosted 
with a second collagen-MDP emulsion 60 days after the first immunization. Paws 
were daily evaluated macroscopically for redness, swelling, distortion, or 
ankylosis of the joints. On the day of sacrifice, rat paws were assessed for 
histopathologic changes. Herbal mixture administration decreased the clinical 
lesion manifestation in the MCIA rat model and led to development of similar or 
slightly more severe histopathological lesions compared to rats that did not 
receive the treatment. The clinical arthritis signs appeared as early as 13 days 
after the first MDP/collagen injection and with peak incidence at 20 days 
post-immunization. Histopathologically, animals showed changes ranging from mild 
to very severe. Administration of the herbal mixture used in this study had a 
clinical therapeutic effect on the course of the clinical manifestations in the 
MCIA model, but the herbal treatment had no such effect on the histopathological 
lesion development and even led to slightly more severe lesions. Rats in the 
MCIA model developed prominent clinical and histopathological changes that were 
comparable to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) lesions in humans.
