A mechanism-based model was developed to describe the time course of arthritis 
progression in the rat. Arthritis was induced in male Lewis rats with type II 
porcine collagen into the base of the tail. Disease progression was monitored by 
paw swelling, bone mineral density (BMD), body weights, plasma corticosterone 
(CST) concentrations, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, interleukin 
(IL)-1beta, IL-6, and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) mRNA expression in paw 
tissue. Bone mineral density was determined by PIXImus II dual energy X-ray 
densitometry. Plasma CST was assayed by high-performance liquid chromatography. 
Cytokine and GR mRNA were determined by quantitative real-time polymerase chain 
reaction. Disease progression models were constructed from transduction and 
indirect response models and applied using S-ADAPT software. A delay in the 
onset of increased paw TNF-alpha and IL-6 mRNA concentrations was successfully 
characterized by simple transduction. This rise was closely followed by an 
up-regulation of GR mRNA and CST concentrations. Paw swelling and body weight 
responses peaked approximately 21 days after induction, whereas bone mineral 
density changes were greatest at 23 days after induction. After peak response, 
the time course in IL-1beta, IL-6 mRNA, and paw edema slowly declined toward a 
disease steady state. Model parameters indicate TNF-alpha and IL-1beta mRNA most 
significantly induce paw edema, whereas IL-6 mRNA exerted the most influence on 
BMD. The model for bone mineral density captures rates of turnover of cancellous 
and cortical bone and the fraction of each in the different regions analyzed. 
This small systems model integrates and quantitates multiple factors 
contributing to arthritis in rats.
