Type II collagen (CII) in joint cartilage is known to be a major auto-antigen in 
human rheumatoid arthritis. Several animal model- and clinical-studies on 
tolerance-based immunotherapy for the arthritis have been conducted by 
administrating synthetic immunodominant peptides through an oral route. In the 
present study, to produce a tolerogenic peptide with therapeutic potential in 
transgenic rice plants, a gene construct producing glutelin fusion protein with 
tandem four repeats of a CII(250-270) peptide (residues 250-270) 
(GluA-4XCII(250-270)) containing a human T-cell epitope was introduced with a 
selection marker, hygromycin phosphotransferase gene (hygromycin-resistance 
gene) (hph), by co-transformation. Several transgenic plants with high and 
stable expression of gluA-4XCII ( 250-270 ), but no hph, were selected based on 
both DNA and protein analyses. The GluA-4XCII(250-270) fusion proteins were 
detected as both precursor and processed forms mainly in a glutelin fraction of 
rice endosperm protein extracts and in protein-body rich fractions prepared by 
density gradient ultracentrifugation. The amount of accumulated CII(250-270) 
peptide was immunochemically estimated to be about 1 microg per seed. Feeding 
DBA/1 mice the transgenic rice seeds (25 microg of the peptide per mouse a day) 
for 2 weeks showed tendencies lowering and delaying serum specific-IgG2a 
response against subsequent and repeated intraperitoneal-injection of type II 
collagen. Taken these together, the CII-immunodominant peptide could effectively 
be produced and accumulated as a glutelin-fusion protein in the transgenic rice 
seeds, which might be useful as pharmaceutical materials and functional food for 
prevention and therapy for anti-CII autoimmune diseases like human rheumatoid 
arthritis.
