OBJECTIVE: Adiponectin (AD) is considered an inflammation modulator. In this 
study, we investigated the effect of AD on rheumatoid arthritis (RA) using a 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model and RA synovial fibroblasts (RASF).
METHODS: Fifteen DBA/1 mice were divided into three groups. All mice, except the 
control group, were injected with type II collagen. AD was intra-articularly 
injected in the left hind legs after arthritis development (the AD-treated 
group). The severity of the arthritis was measured using an arthritis score and 
paw thickness. A histopathological assessment of joint sections was performed by 
haematoxylin/eosin (H&E) staining. Tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, 
interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-3 expression 
was evaluated by immunohistochemical staining in the CIA mice. Synovial tissue 
was obtained from four RA patients during total joint replacement. RASF cultures 
were established from this tissue. RASF were pretreated with AD and stimulated 
by TNFalpha or IL-1beta. TNFalpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, and MMP-3 production was 
measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). RASF proliferation was evaluated using the 
MTT assay.
RESULTS: AD significantly mitigated the severity of the arthritis and 
histopathological findings indicative of RA in CIA mice. TNFalpha, IL-1beta, and 
MMP-3 expression decreased, but IL-6 expression in AD-treated joint tissues 
increased. Moreover, AD reduced TNFalpha, IL-1beta, and MMP-3 expression in 
stimulated RASF and increased IL-6 expression in IL-1beta-stimulated RASF. AD 
significantly inhibited IL-1beta-induced RASF proliferation, despite increased 
IL-6 expression.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that AD may play an anti-inflammatory role in the 
pathophysiology of RA.
