BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a kind of chronic inflammatory 
autoimmune disease. The degradation of extracellular matrix and cartilage pave 
way in understanding the molecular mechanisms in RA. Degradation of cartilage is 
a more complex event involving the local release of metallaoproteases and 
lysosomal enzymes that mediate inflammation in joints and in the synovial fluid 
in RA.
OBJECTIVES: In the present study, the efficacy of a Siddha preparation named 
Kalpaamruthaa (KA) in ameliorating the disease process via markedly reducing the 
joint destruction was demonstrated in adjuvant induced arthritis rat model. KA 
consists of Semecarpus anacardium nut milk extract (SA), dried powder of Emblica 
officinalis fruit and honey.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Both SA and KA were administered at dose of 150 mg/kg 
b.wt. for 14 days after 14 days of adjuvant injection in rats. The activity of 
lysosomal enzymes, the level of collagen, glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and its 
degradative products were analyzed in control and experimental animals.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: The study revealed that KA exhibited a profound 
reduction (p<0.05) in the activities of lysosomal enzymes and thereby decreasing 
(p<0.05) the levels of GAGs and its fractions when compared to arthritis rats. 
The latter was confirmed by Safrannin O staining for GAGs in the interphalangeal 
joints of control and experimental animals. The effect of KA was found to be 
improved than SA and this might be due to the combined interactions of 
phytoconstituents present in KA.
