Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 is known to play an important role in the differentiation 
and maturation of osteoclasts. However, the role of COX-1 in bone metabolism has 
not been well explored. In this study, the bone-conserving effects of 
COX-2-specific (celecoxib), COX-nonselective (loxoprofen), and COX-1-specific 
agents (SC-58560) were compared using an adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rat 
model. Arthritis was induced by injecting 50 microl liquid paraffin containing 1 
mg Mycobacterium butyricum into the left footpad of Lewis rats. Drugs were given 
orally twice daily for 10 days beginning 15 days after adjuvant injection. 
Celecoxib was administered at the rate of 3 mg/kg per day, loxoprofen at 3 mg/kg 
per day, and SC-58560 at 10 mg/kg per day. The therapeutic effects on 3-D 
architectural bone changes in the arthritic condition, e.g., the bone 
volume/total tissue volume ratio and the amount of trabecular bone pattern 
factor, were determined by analyzing the hindpaw calcaneus of AIA rats using 
microcomputed tomography (micro-CT). In addition, dual-energy X-ray 
absorptiometry 2-D bone analysis was performed to compare with micro-CT 
analysis. AIA rats are prone to substantial bone erosion, which allows for 
significant changes in the 3-D architectural index. This inflammatory bone 
destruction was suppressed potently by celecoxib, only moderately by loxoprofen, 
and not at all by SC-58560. These data suggest that COX-2 plays an important 
role in the inflammatory bone destruction that occurs with rheumatoid arthritis. 
The results also suggest that COX-2 is more effective than COX-1 at suppressing 
the destruction of bone associated with arthritis.
