Regulation of IL-6 transsignaling by the administration of soluble gp130 
(sgp130) receptor to capture the IL-6/soluble IL-6R complex has shown promise 
for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, enhancing endogenous 
sgp130 via alternative splicing of the gp130 gene has not yet been tested. We 
found that epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), an anti-inflammatory compound 
found in green tea, inhibits IL-1beta-induced IL-6 production and transsignaling 
in RA synovial fibroblasts by inducing alternative splicing of gp130 mRNA, 
resulting in enhanced sgp130 production. Results from in vivo studies using a 
rat adjuvant-induced arthritis model showed specific inhibition of IL-6 levels 
in the serum and joints of EGCG-treated rats by 28% and 40%, respectively, with 
concomitant amelioration of rat adjuvant-induced arthritis. We also observed a 
marked decrease in membrane-bound gp130 protein expression in the joint 
homogenates of the EGCG-treated group. In contrast, quantitative RT-PCR showed 
that the gp130/IL-6Ralpha mRNA ratio increased by approximately 2-fold, 
suggesting a possible mechanism of sgp130 activation by EGCG. Gelatin zymography 
results showed EGCG inhibits IL-6/soluble IL-6R-induced matrix 
metalloproteinase-2 activity in RA synovial fibroblasts and in joint 
homogenates, possibly via up-regulation of sgp130 synthesis. The results of 
these studies provide previously undescribed evidence of IL-6 synthesis and 
transsignaling inhibition by EGCG with a unique mechanism of sgp130 
up-regulation, and thus hold promise as a potential therapeutic agent for RA.
