It is well known that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have 
significant side effects, such as gastroenteropathy, and rheumatoid arthritis 
patients taking NSAIDs are more susceptible to NSAIDs-induced gastric lesions in 
comparison with other patients. The pathogenic mechanism of these lesions is not 
fully understood. We demonstrate whether interleukin 18 (IL-18) expression 
relate the aggravation of gastric lesion in adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA) rats 
following the oral administration of indomethacin. Arthritis was induced by 
injecting 50 microl of a suspension of 10mg/ml heat-killed butyricum 
(Mycobacterium butyricum) in Bayol F oil into the plantar region of the right 
hind foot and tail of Dark Agouti rats resulting in an arthritis incidence of 
100%. Two weeks after injection, the rats were administered indomethacin 
(40mg/kg) orally, and were killed under deep ether anesthesia 6h later. The 
gastric mucosa was then examined. Oral administration of indomethacin caused 
hemorrhagic lesions in the gastric mucosa of AA rats, and the lesion score for 
AA rats following indomethacin treatment was significantly higher than for 
normal rats administered indomethacin. The expression of the IL-18 mRNA and 
mature IL-18 protein in the gastric mucosa of AA rats administered indomethacin 
were also higher in comparison with normal rats receiving indomethacin. In 
addition, interferon-gamma and nitric oxide levels in the gastric mucosa of AA 
rats were increased by the oral administration of indomethacin. It is possible 
that IL-18 expression in AA rats is more sensitive to indomethacin, and the 
IL-18 may play a role in the aggravation of gastric lesions in AA rats treated 
with indomethacin.
