OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the blockade of Src homology 2 
domain-containing protein tyrosine phosphatase substrate-1 (SHPS-1) has any 
therapeutic effects on rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: A functional blocking monoclonal antibody for SHPS-1 (anti-SHPS-1 mAb) 
was administered at various doses to collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mice, and 
severity of the arthritis was evaluated by clinical and histological scores of 
the limbs. To clarify the mechanisms of action of the antibody, the serum 
concentration of anti-type II collagen antibody was measured in those mice, and 
in vitro experiments were conducted to determine the effects of the antibody on 
the induction of osteoclasts and the release of cytokines from mouse spleen 
cells.
RESULTS: Compared with mice given control IgG, the administration of anti-SHPS-1 
mAb significantly reduced the severity of inflammation and destruction of bone 
and cartilage in CIA mice. This therapeutic effect was observed even when the 
antibody treatment was started after the onset of arthritis. The appearance of 
anti-type II collagen antibody in CIA mice was not altered by the antibody 
treatment. In in vitro experiments, the anti-SHPS-1 mAb significantly inhibited 
osteoclastogenesis of bone marrow cells, and significantly reduced the release 
of interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta), IL-2, IL-12, interferon-gamma, and tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha, but not that of IL-4 or IL-10, from the spleen cells 
after stimulation with concanavalin A.
CONCLUSION: Administration of a monoclonal antibody for SHPS-1 reduced the 
severity of arthritis in CIA mice. Regulation of biological functions of SHPS-1 
may be a novel and potent strategy to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
