Although mast cells (MCs) often are abundant in the synovial tissues of patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis, the contribution of MCs to joint inflammation and 
cartilage loss remains poorly understood. MC-restricted tryptase/heparin 
complexes have proinflammatory activity, and significant amounts of human 
tryptase beta (hTryptase-beta) are present in rheumatoid arthritis synovial 
fluid. Mouse MC protease-6 (mMCP-6) is the ortholog of hTryptase-beta, and this 
serine protease is abundant in the synovium of arthritic mice. We now report 
that C57BL/6 (B6) mice lacking their tryptase/heparin complexes have attenuated 
arthritic responses, with mMCP-6 as the dominant tryptase responsible for 
augmenting neutrophil infiltration in the K/BxN mouse serum-transfer arthritis 
model. While inflammation in this experimental arthritis model was not dependent 
on protease-activated receptor-2, it was dependent on the chemokine receptor 
CXCR2. In support of the latter data, exposure of synovial fibroblasts to 
hTryptase-beta/heparin or mMCP-6/heparin complexes resulted in expression of the 
neutrophil chemotactic factors CXCL1/KC, CXCL5/LIX, and CXCL8/IL-8. Our 
proteomics, histochemistry, and immunohistochemistry data also revealed 
substantial loss of cartilage-derived aggrecan proteoglycans in the arthritic 
joints of wild-type B6 mice but not mMCP-6-null B6 mice. These observations 
demonstrate the functional contribution of MC-restricted tryptase/heparin 
complexes in the K/BxN mouse arthritis model and connect our mouse findings with 
rheumatoid arthritis pathophysiology.
