It is well known that nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have 
significant side effects, such as gastroenteropathy, and that rheumatoid 
arthritis patients taking NSAIDs are more susceptible to NSAIDs-induced gastric 
lesions as compared with patients with other diseases. We demonstrate the 
preventive effect of the co-administration of bittern water (BW, nigari-sui in 
Japanese), which enables the effective intake of Mg(2+), on the ulcerogenic 
response to indomethacin in adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA) rats. Four kinds of 
BW with different Mg(2+) contents; ranging from 10-200 mg/l Mg(2+) (BW-10, 25, 
50, 200) were used in this study. Arthritis was induced by the injection of 50 
microl of a suspension of 10 mg/ml heat-killed butyricum (Mycobacterium 
butyricum) in Bayol F oil into the plantar region of the right hind foot and 
tail of rats. Oral administration of indomethacin (40 mg/kg) caused hemorrhagic 
lesions in the gastric mucosa of AA rats at 14 d after adjuvant injection, and 
the lesion score of AA rats administered indomethacin was significantly higher 
than that of normal rats administered indomethacin. The expression of the mRNA 
for inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) mRNA expression and the production of 
nitric oxide (NO) in the gastric mucosa of AA rats were also increased by the 
administration of indomethacin. The co-administration of BWs decreased the 
ulcerogenic response to indomethacin in AA rats. In addition, the administration 
of BW attenuated the increase in iNOS mRNA expression and NO production in AA 
rats receiving indomethacin. The oral administration of Mg(2+) to AA rats had a 
potent preventive effect on the ulcerogenic response to indomethacin in AA rats, 
probably due to an inhibition in the rise in iNOS and NO levels in the gastric 
mucosa.
