Methotrexate (MTX) has been frequently used in the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). However, its action on arthritis associated male hypogonadism, 
or anorexia related low leptin production has not yet been studied. The 
well-established model of human RA is rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA). In 
the present series we aimed at the evaluation of the effects of MTX on AA 
induced inflammatory parameters, testosterone suppression, and anorexia 
associated lowered leptin release. AA was induced in male Lewis rats by 
intradermal injection of heat killed Mycobacterium butyricum in incomplete 
Freund's adjuvant in the base of the tail. Arthritic rats were treated with two 
doses of MTX: 0.3 and 0.5 mg/kg twice a week orally for the period of 28 days. 
The evaluated parameters were body mass, hind-paw swelling, arthrogram scores, 
serum albumin, total testosterone and leptin on days 14, 21 and 28 of AA. MTX 
treatment ameliorated all parameters studied dose dependently. Higher dose of 
MTX induced a significant reduction in the hind-paw swelling, arthritic score, 
and an increase in serum albumin in all examined time intervals of AA. This dose 
also significantly improved the suppressed testosterone and leptin levels found 
in arthritic rats. Prophylactic MTX treatment of rats with AA improved all 
inflammatory and arthritic parameters studied indicating its clear 
anti-inflammatory effects. The significant improvement of testosterone and 
leptin shows beneficial effects of MTX on reproduction and anorexia related 
leptin reduction during chronic AA.
