Murine collagen induced arthritis (CIA) is a widely used model of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Identification of CIA susceptibility genes will aid in the 
understanding of RA pathogenesis and development of therapeutic targets. This 
study aims to identify and refine quantitative trait loci (QTL) controlling CIA. 
Major CIA clinical traits were evaluated in both (DBA/1xFVB/N) F(2) and advanced 
intercross line (AIL) mice; QTLs were confirmed and refined in AIL. To search 
for candidate genes, we applied multiple approaches, including gene expression 
profiling, identification of nonsynonymous polymorphism, and comparative genomic 
mapping. We identified six suggestive QTLs controlling CIA clinical traits in 
the F(2) progeny; one of these was confirmed and refined in AIL. This QTL is 
located on chromosome 6 and overlaps with Cia3, which was identified previously. 
We refined the 2-log support interval of Cia3 into a 5.6 Mb genomic region; 15 
of 77 genes are differentially expressed or carry nonsynonymous polymorphisms 
between two parental strains. The counterpart genomic region of Cia3 on the rat 
and human genomes are linked to RA. Twenty-nine of 77 genes are located in the 
arthritis-linked genomic regions of all three species. Five of those 29 genes 
are differentially expressed or carry nonsynonymous polymorphisms between 
parental strains: Timp4, Tmem40, Mbd4, Cacna1c, and Lrtm2. Taken together, we 
refined Cia3 into a 5.6 Mb genomic region on mouse chromosome 6 and identified 
candidate genes. This will aid in the search for susceptibility gene(s) 
controlling arthritis development within Cia3 and its counterpart regions in rat 
and human genomes.
