Radix Linderae, the dry roots of Lindera aggregata (Sims) Kosterm (L. 
strychnifolia Vill), has been long-term used in traditional Chinese medicine for 
treating various diseases, and alkaloids are believed to be the main active 
components. Previously, we reported that the total alkaloids from Radix Linderae 
(TARL) could effectively alleviate inflammation and protect joints from 
destruction in mouse collagen-induced arthritis, an animal model of human 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). To get insight into the underlying mechanisms of 
TARL, the present study was performed to investigate the effects of TARL on the 
activation of macrophages and resultant production of inflammatory mediators. In 
vitro, TARL concentration-dependently prevented the production of nitric oxide, 
interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), as 
well as the expressions of iNOS, IL-1beta and TNF-alpha mRNA in RAW 264.7 cells 
stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). However, it showed little effect on the 
production of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and the expression of IL-6 mRNA. Signal 
transduction studies showed that TARL significantly down-regulated the 
phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38 MAP 
kinase rather than c-jun NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK). Additionally, TARL 
prominently decreased LPS-induced activation of IKKalpha and phosphorylation of 
p65 on serine 276, but had little impact on the phosphorylation and degradation 
of IkappaBalpha. In summary, our results demonstrate that TARL exhibits 
inhibitory effects on the production of inflammatory mediators from macrophages 
via blocking NF-kappaB and MAPKs signaling pathways. The findings provide a 
plausible explanation for the therapeutic efficiency of TARL on the inflammation 
and joint destruction in RA.
