The treatment of autoimmune diseases by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation 
remains a promising therapeutic avenue. However, more intensive studies on 
murine models are essential before application to a large number of human 
patients. In particular, the use of bone marrow transplantation to treat 
rheumatoid arthritis has been problematic. We have taken advantage of the 
SKG/Jcl mouse that develops a chronic T cell-mediated autoimmune disease that 
mimics rheumatoid arthritis which attempted to prevent the development of 
immunopathology in these mice by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). 
In particular, we utilized our unique technology in which bone marrow cells 
(BMCs) of control C57BL/6J mice are directly injected into the bone marrow 
cavity in the tibia of SKG mice (intra-bone marrow [IBM]-BMT). As controls, 
SKG/Jcl mice were transplanted with whole BMCs from syngeneic SKG mice. 
Importantly, 12 months after IBM-BMT [B6-->SKG] demonstrated no evidence of 
arthritis, whereas the control [SKG-->SKG] mice demonstrated, the expected 
immunopathology of a rheumatoid arthritis-like condition. Further, 
hematolymphoid cells in [B6-->SKG] mice were reconstituted by donor-derived 
cells and the percentages of Treg (Foxp3+/CD4+) cells, the percentages of 
receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL)+ cells on the CD4+ T 
cells and the serum levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1 and 
interleukin-6 were normalized in the [B6-->SKG] mice. These data suggest that 
IBM-BMT is a viable method of immunological manipulation that suppresses the 
severe joint destruction and bone absorption in SKG/Jcl mice and lends further 
credence to the use of this methodology in humans with intractable rheumatoid 
arthritis.
