OBJECTIVE: To seek a mechanism linking tobacco smoking with the increased 
incidence and severity of rheumatoid arthritis, deduced from many retrospective 
surveys, by studying arthritis/fibrosis development in rats.
METHODS: Rats (>300) received low levels of sodium/potassium thiocyanate (10 or 
25 mmol/l) in their drinking water to raise their blood thiocyanate levels, 
mimicking the elevated levels of blood, salivary and urinary thiocyanate found 
in smokers.
RESULTS: Thiocyanate supplements increased the severity of experimental 
arthritis induced by tailbase injection of (1) Freund's complete adjuvants 
(mycobacteria plus various adjuvant-active oils), (2) collagen type-II with 
Freund's incomplete adjuvant (no mycobacteria), (3) the synthetic lipid amine, 
avridine in an oil and (4) the natural hydrocarbons squalene (C(30)H(50)) and 
pristane (C(19)H(40)). This pro-arthritic effect was independent of sex, rat 
strain or changing diet and housing facilities. Thiocyanate supplements also 
amplified the acute/persisting inflammatory responses to paw injections of 
pristane, zymosan and microcrystalline hydroxyapatite. Iodide salts also 
mimicked some of these effects of thiocyanate.
CONCLUSION: Thiocyanate, a detoxication product of HCN present in tobacco smoke, 
increased (or even induced) inflammatory responses to several agents causing 
arthritis or fibrotic inflammation in rats. It, therefore, can act as a 
co-arthritigen, or 'virulence factor' and could be a therapeutic target to 
reduce arthritis expression and morbidity.
