AIM OF THE STUDY: This study evaluates the anti-inflammatory and analgesic 
activities of the ethanol and aqueous extracts of a Tibetan herb Pterocephalus 
hookeri (C.B. Clarke) Höeck to provide experimental evidence for its traditional 
use such as cold, flu and rheumatoid arthritis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Investigations on the analgesic effects of P. hookeri 
(C.B. Clarke) Höeck were carried out, including hot-plate test and acetic 
acid-induced writhing. The anti-inflammatory activities were observed by 
utilizing the following models: carrageenin-induced edema of the hind paw of 
rats, cotton pellet-induced granuloma formation in rats, acetic acid-induced 
permeability, and xylene-induced ear edema in mice. The effects of the 
administration of indomethacin were also studied.
RESULTS: It has been shown that the ethanol and aqueous extracts significantly 
increased the hot-plate pain threshold and reduced acetic acid-induced writhing 
response in mice. The ethanol and aqueous extracts remarkably inhibited the 
increase in vascular permeability induced by acetic acid and ear edema induced 
by xylene. The ethanol extract also significantly decreased the 
carrageenin-induced rat paw edema perimeter and inhibited the increase of 
granuloma weight.
CONCLUSION: The results show that the ethanol and aqueous extracts have both 
central and peripheral analgesic activities and as anti-inflammatory effects, 
supporting the traditional application of this herb in treating various diseases 
associated with inflammation and pain.
