INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by joint pain, 
allodynia and hyperalgesia. The rat carrageenan model utilizes 
inflammation-associated pain following injection of the knee joint to model RA. 
Traditional assessment of pain in these models utilizes behavioral scoring or 
manual measurements, methods that are labor intensive and prone to subjective 
interpretation. This study utilizes the Digigait system to objectively quantify 
movement and gait dynamics in a monoarthritic rat model.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A pilot study in rats selected "natural" runners using 
Digigait, and also measured inter and intraday variability as well as effects of 
anesthesia on gait dynamics. In the main study, 12 female rats were tested at 
baseline, divided in two groups of 6 rats, briefly anesthetized with isoflurane 
and injected with 60 microl of 2% lambda carrageenan or vehicle; Digigait 
testing was repeated 2 and 4 hours post injection and data analyzed.
RESULTS: Selection of "natural" runners significantly contributed to accuracy 
and reproducibility of gait parameters obtained by the Digigait system. There 
was minimal intra and inter day variation between individual rats and 4 minutes 
of isoflurane anesthesia had no effect on gait dynamic at 2 and 4 hours post 
administration. In the main study a highly reproducible gait signature in the 
injected limb, and well coordinated adaptation of gait during locomotion in the 
non-affected limbs were noted as short-term changes following carrageenan 
injection.
CONCLUSION: Digigait system was found to be an objective and reliable method for 
quantification of early behavioral changes consistent with allodynia and 
hyperalgesia in an inflammatory pain model.
