The gamma isoform of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3Kgamma) has been viewed as 
restricted to leukocytes mediating the regulation of chemokine-induced migration 
and recruitment of neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages. In line with the 
observation that PI3Kgamma-deficient mice display defects in adaptive immunity, 
inhibition of PI3Kgamma reduces synovial inflammation in the collagen-induced 
arthritis mouse model of inflammatory arthritis [rheumatoid arthritis (RA)], 
which has been attributed to reduced influx of inflammatory cells. Challenging 
the concept of leukocyte-restricted PI3Kgamma function, we report here a novel, 
nonredundant function of PI3Kgamma as an important regulator of 
fibroblast-induced cartilage destruction during chronic destructive arthritis. 
We show that in human tumor necrosis factor transgenic mice, the loss of 
PI3Kgamma leads to a milder inflammatory arthritis. Interestingly, PI3Kgamma 
deficiency does not alter the recruitment of inflammatory cells, but 
significantly reduces cartilage damage through reduced expression of matrix 
metalloproteinases in fibroblasts and chondrocytes. In vitro analyses 
demonstrate that the decreased invasiveness of fibroblasts is mediated by 
reduced phosphorylation of Akt and extracellular signal-regulated kinase. Using 
a PI3Kgamma specific inhibitor, these data are confirmed in human synovial 
fibroblasts from patients with RA who exhibit a disease-specific up-regulation 
of PI3Kgamma. Our data indicate that in addition to mediating the recruitment of 
inflammatory cells, PI3Kgamma is an important regulator of fibroblast-mediated 
joint destruction in RA and suggest that specific inhibitors of PI3Kgamma will 
interfere with the activation of RA synovial fibroblasts and reduce cartilage 
destruction in RA.
