Recently, there has been an interest in the use of tacrolimus for the treatment 
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The role of rheumatoid factor (RF) as a cause of 
immunoassay interferences is well known. This study is the first to investigate 
the susceptibility of a tacrolimus immunoassay to interference by RF. Tacrolimus 
apparent concentrations were determined using the antibody conjugated magnetic 
immunoassay (ACMIA) run on the Dimension RxL Immunoassay System in 100 randomly 
selected samples previously submitted for routine diagnostic or monitoring of RA 
in patients not receiving tacrolimus. Fifty of them had an RF concentration 
exceeding 100 IU/L and 50 had an RF concentration below 20 IU/L. Samples with 
tacrolimus apparent whole-blood concentrations above 2.3 ng/mL (limit of 
quantification of the ACMIA assay alleged by the vendor) were considered as 
potential false positives. No positive tacrolimus result was found among the 50 
samples with serum RF < 20 IU/mL. Among the 50 selected samples from patients 
with RF > 100 IU/mL (RF range 110-2650 IU/mL), 2 were positive for tacrolimus 
with ACMIA. In both cases, the pretreatment of these samples with an 
immunoglobulin blocking agent reduced the apparent tacrolimus concentrations to 
below the limit of detection. This was confirmed using the alternative and 
reference tacrolimus assays, both of which reported results below their 
respective limits of detection. The measured human anti-mouse antibodies levels 
were found to be elevated. These results show that certain patients with 
positive RF can have false-positive tacrolimus results using the tacrolimus 
ACMIA-Flex immunoassay on a Dimension RXL analyzer, which was not the case with 
2 other techniques. The interference with the tacrolimus ACMIA results was 
suppressed after preincubation with an immunoglobulin blocking reagent.
