The combined effects of bucillamine (Buc) and etanercept (ETN) on a rat model of 
type II collagen (CII)-induced arthritis (CIA) after treatment onset were 
investigated. In the combination treatment, rats received Buc 30 mg/kg orally 
administered once daily from the onset of arthritis or from 4 days after the 
onset of arthritis and ETN 0.3 mg/kg subcutaneously administered once on the day 
of onset. The effects of monotherapy with Buc and ETN, respectively, and of Buc 
+ ETN combination therapy on the resulting polyarthritis were evaluated by 
histopathological analyses and measurements of hindpaw volumes, serum 
anti-collagen antibody and immunoglobulin levels, and cytokine levels. The Buc + 
ETN therapeutic combination reduced hindpaw swelling, synovial proliferation, 
bone destruction, new bone formation, and inflammatory cell infiltration in CIA. 
Montherapy with Buc showed a tendency to ameliorate these symptoms, while 
monotherapy with ETN reduced hindpaw swelling at 4 days after administration but 
did not maintain treatment efficacy toward the end of the experimental period. 
Histopathological findings did not reveal any efficacy of the ETN therapy. ETN 
alone increased the serum immunoglobulin levels, while its combination with Buc 
reduced these levels. Similar results were obtained for serum anti-CII antibody 
titers. The Buc + ETN combination treatment also reduced serum interleuking 
(IL)-1alpha and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor and tended to 
reduce serum IL-1beta and IL-6 levels. These results suggest that a combination 
therapy of Buc and ETN may be effective for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA).
