Eotaxin-2 is a potent chemoattractant for eosinophils, basophils and T helper 
type 2 (Th2) lymphocytes. The eotaxin-2/CCL24 receptor CCR3 is expressed in 
human brain, skin, endothelium and macrophages. The aim of the current study was 
to evaluate the protective effect of a monoclonal anti-eotaxin-2 antibody on the 
development of adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats (AIA). Adjuvant arthritis was 
induced in Lewis rats by intradermal injection of incomplete Freund's adjuvant 
+Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Rats were treated by intraperitoneal (i.p.) 
injection with three monoclonal antibodies against eotaxin-2 (G7, G8, D8) three 
times per week. Controls were treated with total mouse immunoglobulin G (IgG), 
methotrexate (MTX) or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Arthritis severity was 
evaluated by measuring ankle swelling, arthritic score, whole animal mobility 
and body weight. Sample joints were obtained for pathological evaluation and 
postmortem X-ray of ankle joints was performed to document erosions. Significant 
inhibition of arthritis was observed in rats treated with anti-eotaxin-2 
antibodies compared to those treated with immunoglobulin or PBS. Inhibition was 
manifest in ankle diameter, arthritic score and mobility score. The antibody 
marked D8 showed the greatest efficacy. The effect was observed both in animals 
treated before the appearance of arthritis and in those where treatment was 
begun after development of joint inflammation. Combined treatment with D8 and 
MTX caused additional protection. Significant reduction of inflammation in 
D8-treated animals was also demonstrated in pathological and X-ray examinations. 
Inhibition of eotaxin-2 by monoclonal antibodies has a significant protective 
effect in adjuvant arthritis. These results may introduce a novel therapeutic 
target in rheumatoid arthritis and additional inflammatory joint disorders.
