OBJECTIVE: In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), pain and joint destruction are 
initiated and propagated by the production of proinflammatory mediators. 
Synthesis of these mediators is regulated by the transcription factor NF-kappaB, 
which is controlled by the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS). The present study 
explored the effects of the proteasome inhibitor MG132 on inflammation, pain, 
joint destruction, and expression of sensory neuropeptides as markers of 
neuronal response in a rat model of arthritis.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in rats by injection of heat-killed Mycobacterium 
butyricum. Arthritis severity was scored, and nociception was evaluated by 
mechanical pressure applied to the hind paw. Joint destruction was assessed by 
radiologic and histologic analyses. NF-kappaB DNA-binding activity was analyzed 
by electromobility shift assay, and changes in the expression of the p50 
NF-kappaB subunit and the proinflammatory neuropeptides substance P (SP) and 
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) were detected by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Arthritic rats treated with MG132 demonstrated a marked reduction in 
inflammation, pain, and joint destruction. The elevated DNA-binding activity of 
the NF-kappaB/p50 homodimer and p50, as well as the neuronal expression of SP 
and CGRP, observed in the ankle joints of arthritic rats were normalized after 
treatment with MG132.
CONCLUSION: In arthritic rats, inhibition of proteasome reduced the severity of 
arthritis and reversed the pain behavior associated with joint inflammation. 
These effects may be mediated through the inhibition of NF-kappaB activation and 
may possibly involve the peripheral nervous system. New generations of nontoxic 
proteasome inhibitors may represent a novel pharmacotherapy for RA.
