The invasive properties of fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) correlate with 
radiographic and histologic damage in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and 
pristane-induced arthritis (PIA). We previously determined that highly invasive 
FLS obtained from PIA-susceptible DA (blood type D, Agouti) rats have increased 
expression of genes associated with invasive cancers, including Villin-2/ezrin. 
Villin-2/ezrin mediates invasion via mTOR. In the present study we used the mTOR 
inhibitor rapamycin to assess the role of the ezrin-mTOR pathway on the invasive 
properties of FLS. FLS were isolated from synovial tissues from arthritic DA 
rats, and from RA patients. FLS were treated with rapamycin or dimethyl 
sulfoxide (DMSO) for 24 h and then studied in a Matrigel-invasion assay. 
Supernatants were assayed for matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) activity, and cell 
lysates were used for quantification of mTOR, p70S6K1, 4EBP1 and FAK, as well as 
their respective phosphorylated subsets. Actin filament and FAK localization 
were determined by immunofluorescence. Rapamycin decreased FLS invasion in DA 
and RA tissues by 93% and 82%, respectively. Rapamycin treatment reduced the 
phosphorylation of mTOR and its substrates, p70S6K1 and 4EBP1, confirming mTOR 
inhibition. In conclusion, rapamycin prevented actin reorganization in both DA 
and RA FLS, and inhibited the directional formation of lamellipodia. 
Phosphorylation of the lamellipodia marker FAK was also reduced by rapamycin. 
MMPs were not significantly affected by rapamycin. Rapamycin significantly 
reduced RA and DA rat FLS invasion via the suppression of the mTOR signaling 
pathway. This discovery suggests that rapamycin could have a role in RA therapy 
aimed at reducing the articular damage and erosive changes mediated by FLS.
