OBJECTIVE: To assess the role of T cells in the mouse model of citrullinated 
human fibrinogen-induced rheumatoid arthritis (RA) using CTLA-4Ig, an agent that 
blocks T cell costimulation, which is required for T cell activation.
METHODS: Humanized HLA-DRÎ²1*0401-transgenic (DR4-Tg) mice were immunized with 
Cit-human fibrinogen to induce arthritis. Prior to, and at the onset or peak of, 
arthritis, the DR4-Tg mice were treated with CTLA-4Ig or control human IgG1 or 
were left untreated. Arthritis development and progression were monitored by 
measuring ankle swelling with calipers and by assessing histopathologic changes. 
The immune responses to the citrullinated antigens and the corresponding 
unmodified antigens, as well as the arthritogenicity of lymphocytes from these 
mice, were examined. The latter was performed using lymphocyte transfers from 
CTLA-4Ig-treated or control mice via intraperitoneal injection into naive DR4-Tg 
mice. Recipient mice also received an intraarticular injection of Cit-human 
fibrinogen, unmodified human fibrinogen, or vehicle.
RESULTS: CTLA-4Ig-treated, but not human IgG1-treated, arthritic mice had 
significantly reduced ankle swelling and pathologic joint damage. Treatment with 
CTLA-4Ig, but not human IgG1, suppressed Cit-human fibrinogen-induced T cell 
activation, including citrulline-specific T cell activation, when given prior to 
disease onset. Transfer of splenic lymphocytes from untreated or human 
IgG1-treated arthritic mice caused arthritis in recipients, and this occurred 
when Cit-human fibrinogen, but not unmodified fibrinogen, was deposited into the 
joint. Splenocytes from CTLA-4Ig-treated mice were unable to transfer arthritis.
CONCLUSION: Activated citrulline-specific T cells play a direct role in the 
development and progression of arthritis in this model of Cit-human 
fibrinogen-induced RA.
