In this report, we show that apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1(-/-) (ASK1 KO) 
mice were resistant to inflammatory arthritis induced in the K/BxN serum 
transfer model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The p38 inhibitor, SD-0006 was 
administered to wild type (WT) mice as a comparator. Both ASK1 KO and p38 
inhibition resulted in marked attenuation of edema, cartilage damage, bone 
resorption, and general inflammatory responses. Transcriptional profiling of 
mRNA prepared from paw tissue demonstrated that the production of many 
proinflammatory genes including cytokines, chemokines, and extracellular matrix 
degradative enzymes were maintained at basal levels by either ASK1 KO or 
prophylactic p38 MAPK inhibition. In the mouse whole blood (MWB) assay, tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α)-induced KC and CCL2 levels and also LPS-induced 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), CCL2, and KC levels in MWB from ASK1 KO were significantly 
lower than those from WT. Furthermore, both p38 and JNK were activated by TNF-α 
in human synovial fibroblasts isolated from RA patients (RASF). SD-0006 or 
SP600125, a JNK inhibitor, partially blocked the elevation of IL-6 production in 
RASF following stimulation with TNF-α. In contrast, dual inhibition with both 
p38/JNK inhibitors almost completely abolished TNF-α-induced IL-6 production 
from these cells. Ablation of ASK1 expression in RASF using siRNA for ASK1 
resulted in inhibition of TNF-α-induced IL-6 and PGE(2) production. This study 
is the first to suggest that ASK1 is critical for the development of RA and that 
ASK1 may be involved in the production of proinflammatory mediators in response 
to TNF-α stimulation in the RA joint.
