BACKGROUND: Drug-induced pemphigus is mainly caused by drugs containing 
sulfhydryl (thiol) groups in their molecules.
OBJECTIVES: To understand the serial alteration of anti-desmoglein (Dsg) 
antibody profile in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) receiving thiol 
compounds.
METHODS: Anti-Dsg1 or -Dsg3 antibodies were analysed twice in a 1.6-year 
interval, in the same series of RA patients.
RESULTS: Eleven of 204 serum samples (5.4%) and 6 of 139 samples (4.3%) from the 
same RA group showed a positive reaction against Dsg1 or Dsg3 in the first and 
second screening tests, respectively. The positive rates were higher than those 
in patients with collagen diseases including systemic lupus erythematosus, 
Sj√∂gren syndrome, mixed connective tissue disease, and systemic sclerosis. In 
comparison with the results in the first and second screening tests, one RA 
patient newly gained anti-Dsg3 antibody, and at least 4 patients lost the 
antibodies in 1.6 years. Three patients produced antibodies to Dsg1 and/or Dsg3 
in a similar fashion as did in the first screening tests. Only one RA serum 
sample exhibited an intercellular reactivity to human skin or monkey esophagus 
by immunofluorescence, and another sample bound to a 130 kDa protein suggestive 
of Dsg3 by immunoblotting. Most anti-Dsg antibodies in RA patients recognized 
EDTA-resistant epitopes of Dsg different from EDTA-sensitive epitopes recognized 
by pemphigus sera.
CONCLUSION: RA patients receiving any of the thiol compounds may gain 
autoantibodies to non-conformational epitopes of either Dsg1 or Dsg3, and that 
such autoantibodies alone are not capable of inducing acantholysis.

Copyright 2010 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by 
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
