OBJECTIVE: Interleukin-20 (IL-20) is a proinflammatory cytokine involved in the 
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We investigated whether anti-IL-20 
antibody treatment would modulate the severity of the disease in a 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rat model.
METHODS: We generated a CIA model by immunizing rats with bovine type II 
collagen. Rats with CIA were treated subcutaneously with anti-IL-20 antibody 7E, 
with the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) blocker etanercept, or with 7E in 
combination with etanercept. Arthritis severity was determined according to the 
hind paw thickness, arthritis severity score, degree of cartilage damage, bone 
mineral density, and cytokine production, which were evaluated using radiologic 
scans, microfocal computed tomography, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. To 
analyze gene regulation by IL-20, rat synovial fibroblasts (SFs) were isolated 
and analyzed for the expression of RANKL, IL-17, and TNFα. We also used 
real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis and flow cytometry to 
determine IL-20-regulated RANKL in mouse osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells and Th17 
cells.
RESULTS: In vivo, treatment with 7E alone or in combination with etanercept 
significantly reduced the severity of arthritis by decreasing the hind paw 
thickness and swelling, preventing cartilage damage and bone loss, and reducing 
the expression of IL-20, IL-1β, IL-6, RANKL, and matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMPs) in synovial tissue. In vitro, IL-20 induced TNFα expression in SFs from 
rats with CIA. IL-20 markedly induced RANKL production in SFs, osteoblasts, and 
Th17 cells.
CONCLUSION: Selectively blocking IL-20 inhibited inflammation and bone loss in 
rats with CIA. Treatment with 7E combined with etanercept protected rats from 
CIA better than treatment with etanercept alone. Our findings provide evidence 
that IL-20 is a novel target and that 7E may be a potential therapeutic agent 
for RA.
