OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of bortezomib in splenocytes and 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) and its in vivo potency in a rat model of 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA), which resembles human rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA).
METHODS: AIA was induced with Freund's complete adjuvant. Splenocyte and FLS 
proliferation and apoptosis were measured by radioactivity incorporation and 
flow cytometry, respectively. The invasiveness of FLS from rats with AIA was 
tested in a Transwell system. The pattern of cytokine secretion was evaluated by 
cytometric bead array in splenocyte supernatants. Bortezomib was administered 
prophylactically or therapeutically, and arthritis was assessed clinically and 
histologically. Immunohistochemistry was performed for markers of inflammation 
and angiogenesis in joints. Hematologic and biochemical parameters were tested 
in peripheral blood (PB). Representative animals were examined by computed 
tomography (CT) scanning before and after bortezomib administration. The 
expression of Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR-2), TLR-3, and TLR-4 in PB and FLS was 
measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction, and alterations in specific 
cell populations in PB and spleen were determined by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: In vitro, bortezomib exhibited significant inhibitory and proapoptotic 
activity in splenocytes and FLS from rats with AIA, altered the inflammatory 
cytokine pattern, and reduced the invasiveness of FLS from rats with AIA. In 
vivo, bortezomib significantly ameliorated disease severity. Remission was 
associated with improved histology and decreased expression of CD3, CD79a, 
CD11b, cyclooxygenase 1, and factor VIII in target tissues as well as 
down-regulation of TLR expression in PB and cultured FLS. CT scanning 
demonstrated a bone healing effect after treatment.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that bortezomib affects AIA in a pleiotropic 
manner and that this drug may be effective in RA.
