Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are marked by the presence of autoantibodies against 
negatively changed DNA, phospholipids, heparin, and chondroitin sulfate, 
respectively. Heparin/protein complexes induce contact system activation in HIT 
patient plasmas. The activated contact system generates thrombin. Thrombin is 
responsible for thrombosis, a common cause of death and disabilities for both 
HIT and SLE. In this chapter, we analyze plasma contact system proteins, 
thrombin- and kallikrein-like activities, glucosamine and galactosamine content 
from SLE-, RA-, osteoarthritis (OA)-, and psoriasis (Ps)-patient plasmas in 
addition to pooled 30+ healthy patient plasmas. We found that all SLE patient 
plasmas exhibited abnormal contact systems marked by the absence of high 
molecular weight kininogen, the presence of processed C1 inhibitor (C1inh), the 
display of abnormal thrombin- and kallikrein-like activities, and increased 
levels of plasma glucosamine and galactosamine. Different patterns of contact 
system activation distinguish SLE, RA, and Ps whereas no contact system 
activation is observed in normal and OA patient plasmas. The presence of 
paradoxical "lupus anticoagulants" in certain thrombosis-prone SLE patient 
plasmas, marked by delayed clotting in clinical plasma test, was explained by 
the consumption of contact system proteins, especially high molecular weight 
kininogen. Finally, we discovered that mouse and human SLE autoantibodies bind 
to cell surface GAGs with structural selectivity. In conclusion, markers of 
abnormal contact system activation represent potential new targets for 
autoimmune disease diagnosis, prevention, and treatment. These markers might 
also be useful in monitoring SLE activity/severity and in pinpointing patients 
with SLE-associated arthritis and psoriasis.
