Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) has been known as an emerging therapeutic 
target in autoimmunity-related arthritis. The treatment responses of adenoviral 
vectors encoding IDO (AdIDO) gene therapy in rat collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) were examined in this study. The therapeutic effects on ankle 
circumference, articular index, and radiographic and histological scores were 
evaluated in AdIDO-injected ankle joints. We further determined CD4+ T-cell 
numbers and their apoptotic status, CD68(+) macrophage numbers, kynurenine (a 
downstream tryptophan metabolite) concentrations, interleukin-17 (IL-17) levels, 
and retinoic acid-related orphan receptor γt (RORγt) expression in synovial 
tissues of CIA rats receiving AdIDO treatment. Reduction of ankle circumference, 
articular index, and radiographic and histological scores were noted in 
AdIDO-treated ankles, as compared with those receiving injection of control 
vectors. Furthermore, IDO gene transfer led to decreased infiltrating CD4+ T 
cells with enhanced apoptosis, reduced CD68+ macrophage numbers, increased 
kynurenine levels, lower IL-17 concentrations, and decreased RORγt expression 
within the ankle joints. In addition, such a therapy diminished type II 
collagen-specific IL-17 production and RORγt expression in CD4+ T cells from 
draining lymph nodes of CIA rats. Our results demonstrate for the first time 
that intra-articular delivery of IDO gene ameliorated ankle arthritis of CIA 
rats by induction of CD4+ T-cell apoptosis and reduction of synovial IL-17 
production through the supplement of kynurenine. Taken together, these findings 
implicate the novel strategy of using IDO gene as a therapeutic approach in 
treating patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
