The objective of this investigation was to develop novel colon specific drug 
delivery. Aceclofenac, a NSAID, was successfully encapsulated into chitosan 
microspheres. Various formulations were prepared by varying the ratio of 
chitosan, span-85 and stirring speed and the amount of glutaraldehyde. The SEM 
study showed that microspheres have smooth surfaces. Microspheres were 
characterised by Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and differential 
scanning calorimetry (DSC) to confirm the absence of chemical interactions 
between drug and polymer and to know the formation of microspheres structure. 
The microspheres were evaluated for particle size, encapsulation efficiency, 
drug loading capacity, mucoadhesion studies, stability studies, in vitro and in 
vivo drug release studies. Particle sizes, as measured by the laser light 
scattering technique, were of an average size in the range 41-80 µm. The 
swelling index was in the range 0.37-0.82 and the entrapment efficiency range 
was 51-75% for all the formulations. The optimised batch ACM(13) released 83.6% 
at 8 h and 104% at 24 h in SCF containing rat caecal content. Eudragit coated 
chitosan microspheres prevented the release of the aceclofenac in the 
physiological environment of the stomach and small intestine and released 
95.9±0.34% in the colon. With regard to release kinetics, the data were best 
fitted with the Higuchi model and showed zero order release with non-Fickian 
diffusion mechanism. The in vivo findings suggest that aceclofenac microspheres 
exhibit a prolonged effect of aceclofenac in rats and produce a significant 
anti-inflammatory effect. The findings of the present study conclusively state 
that chitosan microspheres are promising for colon targeting of aceclofenac to 
synchronise with chronobiological symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis.
