Rituximab is a chimeric murine/human-engineered immunoglobulin (Ig) G1 anti-CD20 
monoclonal antibody, selectively depleting CD20-expressing cells in peripheral 
blood and lymphoid tissues. As part of the rituximab registration-enabling 
program for rheumatoid arthritis, cynomolgus monkey embryo-fetal development and 
pre- and postnatal developmental toxicity studies were performed. In both 
studies, female cynomolgus monkeys were administered rituximab iv at doses of 
0/0, 15/20, 37.5/50, and 75/100 mg/kg (loading dose/study dose) from gestation 
day (GD) 20 to 50 for the embryo-fetal development study and GD 20 to postpartum 
(pp) day 28 for the pre- and postnatal study. In the embryo-fetal development 
study, although maternal dosing ended during the first trimester at GD 50, 
placental transfer of rituximab to fetuses was demonstrated at GD 100. 
Consequently, fetuses demonstrated B-cell depletion in lymphoid tissues at GD 
100. Repletion of B cells was demonstrated in infants in a follow-up pre- and 
postnatal study following fetal and neonatal exposure. In the pre- and postnatal 
study, despite B-cell depletion, there was no significant functional consequence 
on the infant's ability to mount T-cell-dependent antibody responses following 
vaccination or antigenic challenge. Overall, rituximab was well tolerated at 
maximum feasible doses up to 100 mg/kg in pregnant cynomolgus monkeys and their 
infants after exposure from the period of organogenesis throughout pregnancy, 
parturition, and postnatal development. Importantly, the preclinical data have 
been concordant with the clinical data in children for cases where rituximab was 
administered during pregnancy.
