PURPOSE: The graft-versus-tumor (GVT) effect is a potent form of immunotherapy 
against many hematologic malignancies and some solid tumors. The beneficial GVT 
effect after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) is tightly linked to 
its most significant complication, graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). The role of 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) after allogeneic BMT is not well understood. This study 
used a series of complementary knockout and antibody blockade strategies to 
analyze the impact of IL-6 in multiple clinically relevant murine models of GVHD 
and GVT.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We examined the effect of the source of IL-6 by analyzing 
the role IL-6 deficiency in donor T cells, donor bone marrow or in host tissues. 
We confirmed and extended the relevance of IL-6 deficiency on GVHD and GVT by 
treating BMT recipients with anti-mouse IL-6 receptor (IL-6R), MR16-1.
RESULTS: Deficiency of IL-6 in donor T cells led to prolongation of survival. 
Total inhibition of IL-6 with MR16-1 caused an even greater reduction in 
GVHD-induced mortality. The reduction in GVHD was independent of the direct 
effects on T effector cell expansion or donor regulatory T cells. GVT responses 
were preserved after treatment with MR16-1.
CONCLUSION: MR16-1 treatment reduced GVHD and preserved sufficient GVT. 
Tocilizumab, a humanized anti-IL-6R monoclonal antibody (mAb), is approved in 
several countries including the United States and European Union for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases. Blockade of 
IL-6 with anti-IL-6R mAb therapy may be testable in clinical trials as an 
adjunct to prevent GVHD in BMT patients without a significant loss of GVT.
