OBJECTIVE: Neutrophil accumulation is balanced by both cell infiltration and 
cell clearance, the controls of which are pivotal in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other chronic inflammatory diseases. Of the 
neutrophil-specific proteases, matrix metalloproteinase 8 (MMP-8; also known as 
neutrophil collagenase or collagenase 2) is traditionally viewed as being 
crucial for collagen degradation and hence cell migration and infiltration. This 
study was undertaken to examine the role of MMP-8 in a murine model of 
spontaneous RA.
METHODS: MMP-8(-/-) mice were backcrossed onto the Fas-defective MRL/lpr 
background, a mouse strain characterized by systemic autoimmunity including 
spontaneous autoimmune arthritis. Arthritis was induced with Freund's complete 
adjuvant and clinical disease and histologic parameters were assessed.
RESULTS: MMP-8(-/-) mice had earlier and more severe joint inflammation than 
their MMP-8(+/+) counterparts, coupled with a massive accumulation of 
neutrophils in synovial tissue, an unexpected result considering the commonly 
held view that MMP-8 has important extracellular matrix-degradative functions. 
Protease and protease inhibitor analysis of MMP-8(-/-) mouse neutrophils by 
CLIP-CHIP microarray revealed very little additional change in protease levels 
except for low expression of the apoptosis initiator caspase 11. This was 
confirmed at the protein level in unstimulated, lipopolysaccharide-treated, and 
interferon-Î³-treated MMP-8(-/-) mouse neutrophils. Downstream of caspase 11, the 
activity of the apoptosis executioner caspase 3 was consequently reduced in 
MMP-8(-/-) mouse neutrophils, translating to reduced neutrophil apoptosis and 
cell accumulation compared with wild-type mouse cells.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that MMP-8 is not essential for neutrophil 
migration in arthritis and likely other autoimmune diseases. Rather, MMP-8 is 
important for normal rates of neutrophil apoptosis and hence regulates cell 
clearance. Because MMP-8 deficiency leads to an exaggerated accumulation of 
neutrophil infiltrates due to delayed apoptosis and concurrent pathologic 
changes associated with dramatically increased neutrophil infiltration, MMP-8 is 
antiinflammatory and therefore a drug antitarget in the treatment of arthritis.
