Transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand 
interactor-immunoglobulin (TACI-Ig) is a human fusion protein that binds and 
neutralizes both B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS), a cytokine shown to be a key 
regulator of B cell maturation, proliferation and survival, and a 
proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL). Rat adjuvant arthritis (AA) is an 
experimental animal model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), which is mainly 
dependent on T cells and neutrophil-mediated cytokine production. The purpose of 
the present study was to investigate the effects of TACI-Ig on rat AA. Rat AA 
was induced by intradermal injection of 0·1 ml complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). 
TACI-Ig (0·7, 2·1 and 6·3 mg/kg), recombinant human tumour necrosis factor-α 
receptor (rhTNFR) : Fc (2·8 mg/kg) and IgG-Fc (6·3 mg/kg) were administered 
subcutaneously every other day from days 16 to 34 after immunization. Arthritis 
was evaluated by arthritis global assessment and swollen joint count (SJC). The 
ankle joint and spleen were harvested for histopathological examination. Spleen 
index and thymus index were calculated. The levels of BLyS, interleukin (IL)-17, 
interferon (IFN)-γ, IgG1, IgG2a and IgM in AA rat spleen were measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Administration of TACI-Ig significantly 
reduced the arthritis global assessment and SJC, decreased spleen index and 
ameliorated histopathological manifestations of rat AA. Suppressing the levels 
of BLyS, IL-17, IFN-γ and Ig in AA rat spleen were observed after administration 
of TACI-Ig. These results showed that TACI-Ig significantly inhibited the degree 
of rat AA, and the inhibitory effects might be associated with its ability to 
reduce BLyS, proinflammatory cytokines and Ig levels in spleen.

© 2010 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2010 British Society 
for Immunology.
