Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common disease characterized by chronic 
inflammation and irreversible destruction of articular cartilage and bone. In 
this report, we examined the anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic effects of a 
novel leflunomide analogue, UTL-5b (also known as GBL-5b), for potential RA 
treatment. Using a carrageenan-induced edema study in rats, UTL-5b exhibited a 
better anti-inflammatory effect as compared with leflunomide and its metabolite. 
The chronic efficacy of UTL-5b was examined using type II collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) mouse model. UTL-5b exerted an anti-arthritic effect in a 
dose-dependant manner with mice given 30 mg/kg exhibiting amelioration of 
disease early in the trial, but losing statistical significance over time. In 
contrast, mice treated with 60 mg/kg showed reduced clinical disease parameters 
early in the trial and these effects were sustained over the ten week trial 
period. Mechanistic studies indicate that UTL-5b is an inhibitor of TNF-α 
production in vivo. Oral administration of UTL-5b prior to i.p. injection with 
lethal dose of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)/D-galactosamine markedly reduced the 
levels of serum TNF-α and increased survival rates of animals from septic 
shock-induced death. Acute toxicity study using mice receiving increasing doses 
of UTL-5b showed that no animals were killed by UTL-5b at 2,000 mg/kg (LD(50) 
>2,000 mg/kg). Our studies show that UTL-5b represents a novel anti-inflammatory 
and anti-arthritic agent with potential therapeutic application for RA 
treatment.
