We and others have reported that human NF-κB inhibitor-like-1 (NFKBIL1) was a 
putative susceptible gene for autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). However, its precise role in the pathogenesis of RA is still largely 
unknown. In this study, we generated transgenic mice expressing human NFKBIL1 
(NFKBIL1-Tg) and examined whether NFKBIL1 plays some role(s) in the development 
of autoimmune arthritis. In both a collagen-induced arthritis model and a 
collagen antibody-induced arthritis model, NFKBIL1-Tg mice showed resistance to 
arthritis compared to control mice, indicating that the gene product of NFKBIL1 
was involved in the control of thusly induced arthritis. Total spleen cells of 
NFKBIL1-Tg mouse showed decreased proliferation to mitogenic stimuli, consistent 
with its resistance to arthritis. Unexpectedly, purified T cells of NFKBIL1-Tg 
mouse showed increased proliferation and cytokine production. This apparent 
discrepancy was accounted for by the impaired functions of antigen-presenting 
cells of NFKBIL1-Tg mouse; both T/B cell-depleted spleen cells and bone 
marrow-derived dendritic cells of the Tg mouse induced less prominent 
proliferation and IL-2 production of T cells. Furthermore, dendritic cells (DCs) 
derived from NFKBIL1-Tg mouse showed lower expression of co-stimulatory 
molecules and decreased production of inflammatory cytokines when they were 
activated by lipopolysaccharide. Taken together, these results indicated that 
NFKBIL1 affected the pathogenesis of RA at least in part through the regulation 
of DC functions.

© 2011 The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology © 2011 Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd.
