OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a debilitating autoimmune disease, and 
smoking is an important environmental factor in a subset of RA patients. A role 
of the cholinergic antiinflammatory pathway in autoimmune inflammation is 
increasingly being realized. Nicotine is a major component of cigarette smoke, 
and it stimulates the Î±7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Therefore, defining 
the mechanisms underlying the immunomodulatory effects of nicotine on arthritis 
is of high relevance. The purpose of this study was to address this issue using 
the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) model of human RA.
METHODS: Lewis rats were immunized subcutaneously with heat-killed Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis H37Ra for disease induction. Rats were treated with nicotine 
intraperitoneally either before (pretreatment) or after (posttreatment) the 
onset of AIA. Control rats received the vehicle (buffer) in place of nicotine. 
The severity of arthritis was assessed and graded. The draining lymph node cells 
were tested for T cell proliferative and cytokine responses against the 
disease-related antigen mycobacterial heat-shock protein 65. The sera were 
tested for anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies and 
anti-mycobacterial Hsp65 antibodies.
RESULTS: Nicotine pretreatment aggravated the arthritis, whereas nicotine 
posttreatment suppressed the disease. This altered severity of AIA directly 
correlated with the levels of the anti-CCP antibodies, of the Th1/Th17 
cytokines, and of the corresponding dendritic cell-derived cytokines. The 
majority of these effects on cellular responses could be replicated in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Nicotine-induced modulation of AIA involves specific alterations in 
the disease-related cellular and humoral immune responses in AIA. These results 
are of significance in advancing our understanding of the pathogenesis of RA.
