OBJECTIVE: Certain HLA class II alleles are associated with susceptibility to 
the development of arthritis. However, the development of arthritis in some 
persons carrying non-rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-associated alleles remains 
unexplained. An individual who is heterozygous for the DQA1 and DQB1 genes can 
express the DQ molecule in cis or trans heterodimers. In a cis heterodimer, the 
α-chain interacts with the β-chain coded by the same chromosome, while in a 
trans heterodimer it interacts with the β-chain on the other chromosome. In this 
study, we used a humanized mouse model of arthritis in an attempt to determine 
whether a trans heterodimer of 2 nonassociated alleles, DQB1*0601 and DQB1*0604, 
can predispose to arthritis.
METHODS: DQB1*0601 and *0604 occur in linkage with DQA1*0103 and *0102, 
respectively. To understand the role of trans heterodimers, we generated 
DQB1*0604/DQA1*0103-transgenic mice lacking endogenous HLA class II molecules.
RESULTS: Severe arthritis developed in the DQB1*0604/A1*0103-trangenic mice, and 
an antigen-specific response was generated in vitro. DQB1*0604/DQA1*0103 
presented type II collagen-derived peptides that were not presented by the 
arthritis-resistant DQB1*0601 allele, suggesting that trans heterodimer 
molecules between 2 DQB1 and DQA1 molecules may result in the presentation of 
unique antigens and susceptibility to the development of arthritis. Molecular 
modeling of type II collagen peptides showed that DQB1*0604/DQA1*0103 shares a 
p4 pocket with the arthritis-susceptible DQB1*0302 allele, suggesting a critical 
role of the p4 and p9 pockets in susceptibility to arthritis.
CONCLUSION: These results provide a possible explanation for the parental 
inheritance of nonsusceptibility alleles in some patients with RA and a 
mechanism by which they can predispose to the development of arthritis.
