BACKGROUND: Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) is a multi-functional protein that has 
anti-inflammatory and tissue protective properties. We previously reported that 
human AAT (hAAT) gene therapy prevented autoimmune diabetes in non-obese 
diabetic (NOD) mice and suppressed arthritis development in combination with 
doxycycline in mice. In the present study we investigated the feasibility of 
hAAT monotherapy for the treatment of chronic arthritis in collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: DBA/1 mice were immunized with bovine type II collagen (bCII) to induce 
arthritis. These mice were pretreated either with hAAT protein or with 
recombinant adeno-associated virus vector expressing hAAT (rAAV-hAAT). Control 
groups received saline injections. Arthritis development was evaluated by 
prevalence of arthritis and arthritic index. Serum levels of B-cell activating 
factor of the TNF-Î± family (BAFF), antibodies against both bovine (bCII) and 
mouse collagen II (mCII) were tested by ELISA.
RESULTS: Human AAT protein therapy as well as recombinant adeno-associated virus 
(rAAV8)-mediated hAAT gene therapy significantly delayed onset and ameliorated 
disease development of arthritis in CIA mouse model. Importantly, hAAT therapies 
significantly reduced serum levels of BAFF and autoantibodies against bCII and 
mCII, suggesting that the effects are mediated via B-cells, at least partially.
CONCLUSION: These results present a new drug for arthritis therapy. Human AAT 
protein and gene therapies are able to ameliorate and delay arthritis 
development and reduce autoimmunity, indicating promising potential of these 
therapies as a new treatment strategy for RA.
