INTRODUCTION: Previously, secretory phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) inhibition has been 
used as an adjunct to conventional rheumatoid arthritis therapy in human 
clinical trials without significant improvement of arthritic pathology. In this 
study, we compared the efficacy of a potent and orally active group IIa 
secretory phospholipase A2 inhibitor (sPLA2I) to conventional anti-arthritic 
agents; infliximab, leflunomide and prednisolone, in a rat model of 
antigen-induced arthritis.
METHODS: Initially, to establish efficacy and dose-response, rats were orally 
dosed with the sPLA2I (1 and 5 mg/kg) two days prior to arthritis induction, and 
then daily throughout the 14-day study period. In the second trial, rats were 
orally dosed with the sPLA2I (5 and 10 mg/kg/day) beginning two days after the 
induction of arthritis, at the peak of joint swelling. Separate groups of rats 
were also dosed with the tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-Î±) inhibitor 
infliximab (single 3 mg/kg i.v. injection), leflunomide (10 mg/kg/day, oral) or 
prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day, oral) at this same time point and used as comparative 
treatments.
RESULTS: In the pathology prevention trial, both 1 and 5 mg/kg dose groups of 
sPLA2I demonstrated a significant reduction in joint swelling and gait 
disturbances; however, only the higher 5 mg/kg dose resulted in significantly 
reduced histopathology scores. In the post-induction trial, rats dosed with 
sPLA2I showed a significant improvement in joint swelling and gait scoring, 
whereas none of the conventional therapeutics achieved a significant decrease in 
both of these two disease markers. Histopathological scoring at the end-point of 
the study demonstrated significantly reduced median scores in rats treated with 
10 mg/kg sPLA2I and leflunomide.
CONCLUSIONS: The results from this study suggest a pathogenic role for sPLA2 
enzymes in this model of arthritis in rats, and the potential clinical utility 
of sPLA2 inhibition as a safer, and more effective, alternative to conventional 
anti-arthritic therapeutics.
