Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by joint inflammation and bone 
destruction. The receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand 
(RANKL)-osteoprotegerin (OPG) system is important for maintaining the balance 
between bone resorption and formation. Both serum RANKL/OPG protein and synovial 
tissue RANKL/OPG mRNA ratios are elevated in patients with RA. Studies indicate 
that hormones of pregnancy, estrogens and relaxin, administered in combination, 
reduce circulating (TNF)-α and joint inflammation in a rat adjuvant-induced 
arthritis (AIA) model of RA. The purpose of this study was to investigate 
whether relaxin (RLX), alone or in combination with estrogens, regulates the 
bone remodeling markers RANKL and OPG in vivo and in vitro. Results show that in 
AIA rats, treatment with relaxin, estradiol valerate (EV) or EV in combination 
with relaxin had no effect on circulating RANKL. However, EV increased systemic 
OPG and combined treatment with EV and relaxin further increased circulating OPG 
in comparison to EV alone. Importantly, the RANKL/OPG protein ratio was lower in 
rats treated with EV or EV+RLX when compared to arthritic controls. Relaxin in 
combination with EV decreased local RANKL transcripts, increased OPG mRNA and 
decreased the RANKL/OPG mRNA ratio in joints of arthritic rats when compared to 
controls. RLX family peptide receptor 1 (RXFP1) gene expression in joints of AIA 
rats increased in response to EV and EV+RLX. In parathyroid hormone-pretreated 
murine UMR 106-01 osteoblast cells, 17-β-estradiol (E) and E+RLX increased RXFP1 
transcripts, while RLX reduced RANKL mRNA and protein expression. However, in 
vitamin D-treated primary rat osteoblast cells E+RLX increased OPG protein and 
reduced the RANKL/OPG protein ratio. These results suggest that modulation of 
the RANKL-OPG system by estrogens and RLX may contribute to their antiarthritic 
effects on bone during pregnancy.
