OBJECTIVE: Since transcription factors expressed in osteoclasts are possible 
targets for regulation of bone destruction in bone disorders, we investigated 
the expression of the transcription factor FBI-1/OCZF/LRF (in humans, factor 
that binds to inducer of short transcripts of human immunodeficiency virus type 
1; in rats, osteoclast-derived zinc finger; in mice, leukemia/lymphoma-related 
factor) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and assessed its role in 
osteoclastogenesis in vivo.
METHODS: Expression of FBI-1/OCZF was investigated in subchondral osteoclasts in 
human RA and in rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) using immunostaining and in 
situ hybridization, respectively. Transgenic mice overexpressing OCZF (OCZF-Tg) 
under the control of the cathepsin K promoter were generated, and bone mineral 
density and bone histomorphometric features were determined by peripheral 
quantitative computed tomography, calcein double-labeling, and specific staining 
for osteoclasts and osteoblasts. LRF/OCZF expression and the consequence of LRF 
inhibition were assessed in vitro with RANKL-induced osteoclast differentiation.
RESULTS: FBI-1/OCZF was detected in the nuclei of osteoclasts in rat AIA and 
human RA. RANKL increased the levels of LRF messenger RNA and nuclear-localized 
LRF protein in primary macrophages. In OCZF-Tg mice, bone volume was 
significantly decreased, the number of osteoclasts, but not osteoblasts, was 
increased in long bones, and osteoclast survival was promoted. Conversely, 
inhibition of LRF expression suppressed the formation of osteoclasts from 
macrophages in vitro.
CONCLUSION: FBI-1/OCZF/LRF regulates osteoclast formation and apoptosis in vivo, 
and may become a useful marker and target in treating disorders leading to 
reduced bone density, including chronic arthritis.
