Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease associated with chronic 
inflammation of the joints. RA has been shown to increase the morbidity of and 
mortality due to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases. We recently 
reported that cerebrovascular permeability was increased in mice with 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), an animal model of RA. S100A4, a member of the 
S100 family, is up-regulated in synovial fluid and plasma from RA patients. This 
study was aimed at evaluating a role of S100A4 in the mediation of blood-brain 
barrier (BBB) dysfunction in CIA mice. CIA was induced by immunization with type 
II collagen in mice. Cerebrovascular permeability was assessed by measurement of 
sodium fluorescein (Na-F) levels in the brains of control and CIA mice. Serum 
S100A4 concentrations in control and CIA mice were measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assays (ELISA). Accumulation of Na-F in the brain and serum levels 
of S100A4 were increased in CIA mice. Increased S100A4 levels in the serum are 
closely correlated with hyperpermeability of the cerebrovascular endothelium to 
Na-F. We investigated whether S100A4 induces BBB dysfunction using mouse brain 
capillary endothelial cells (MBECs). S100A4 decreased the transendothelial 
electrical resistance and increased Na-F permeability in the MBECs. S100A4 
reduced the expression of occludin, a tight junction protein, and stimulated p53 
expression in MBECs. These findings suggest that S100A4 increases paracellular 
permeability of MBECs by decreasing expression levels of occludin, at least in 
part, via p53. The present study highlights a potential role for S100A4 in BBB 
dysfunction underlying cerebrovascular diseases in patients with RA.
