INTRODUCTION: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are likely to play crucial roles in the 
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim of this study was to 
determine the key TLRs in synovium and explore their roles in the activation of 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) mediated by T cells in arthritis.
METHODS: Pristane-induced arthritis (PIA) was established by subcutaneous 
injection with pristane at the base of the rat's tail. TLR expression in 
synovium from PIA rats was detected at different time points by performing 
real-time PCR. Polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)) was intra-articularly 
administrated to PIA rats, and arthritis was monitored macroscopically and 
microscopically. Synovial TLR3 was detected by immunohistochemical staining. Rat 
FLSs were stimulated with pristane-primed T cells or pristane-primed, T-cell 
conditioned medium. The intervention of TLR3 in FLSs was achieved by specific 
short-hairpin RNA (shRNA) or an antibody. The migration ability of FLSs was 
measured by using the scratch test, and gene expression was detected by using 
real-time PCR. FLSs from RA patients were stimulated with various cytokines and 
TLR ligands, and TLR3 expression was detected by performing real-time PCR. In 
addition, with different concentrations of poly(I:C) stimulation, TLR3 
expression of FLSs from RA patients and patients with osteoarthritis (OA) was 
compared.
RESULTS: Synovium TLR3 displayed early and persistent overexpression in PIA 
rats. TLR3 was expressed in FLSs, and local treatment with poly(I:C) 
synergistically aggravated the arthritis. Rat FLSs co-cultured with 
pristane-primed T cells showed strengthened migration ability and significant 
upregulation of TLR3, IFN-Î², IL-6 and matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP3) 
expression, which could also be induced by pristane-primed, T-cell conditioned 
medium. The upregulation of cytokines and MMPs was blocked by shRNA or TLR3 
antibodies. In RA FLSs with cytokine or TLR ligand stimulation, TLR3 expression 
exhibited remarkable upregulation. Furthermore, RA FLSs showed higher reactivity 
than OA FLSs to poly(I:C).
CONCLUSIONS: TLR3 in the synovium of PIA rats was overexpressed, and activation 
of the TLR3 signaling pathway could aggravate this arthritis. The induction of 
TLR3 in FLSs resulted from T cell-derived inflammatory stimulation and could 
further mediate FLS activation in arthritis. We conclude that TLR3 upregulation 
of FLSs activated by T cells results in articular inflammation.
