OBJECTIVE: To determine the regulation of class II major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) expression in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) in order to 
investigate their role as nonprofessional antigen-presenting cells in 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: Expression of class II MHC, class II MHC transactivator (CIITA), and 
Ciita isoforms PI, PIII, and PIV was examined by real-time quantitative 
polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, and flow cytometry in human 
synovial tissues, arthritic mouse joints, and human and murine FLS. CIA was 
induced in mice in which isoform PIV of Ciita was knocked out (PIV(-/-) ), in 
PIV(-/-) mice transgenic for CIITA in the thymus (K14 CIITA), and in their 
control littermates.
RESULTS: HLA-DRA, total CIITA, and CIITA PIII messenger RNA levels were 
significantly increased in synovial tissue samples from patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis compared with the levels in tissue from patients with osteoarthritis. 
Human FLS expressed surface class II MHC via CIITA PIII and PIV, while class II 
MHC expression in murine FLS was entirely mediated by PIV. Mice with a targeted 
deletion of CIITA PIV lack CD4+ T cells and were protected against CIA. The 
expression of CIITA was restored in the thymus of PIV(-/-) K14 CIITA-transgenic 
mice, which had a normal CD4+ T cell repertoire and normal surface levels of 
class II MHC on professional antigen-presenting cells, but did not induce class 
II MHC on FLS. Synovial inflammation and immune responses against type II 
collagen were similar in PIV(-/-) K14 CIITA-transgenic mice and control mice 
with CIA, but bone erosion was significantly reduced in the absence of PIV.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of class II MHC is tightly correlated with CIITA 
expression in arthritic synovium and in FLS. Selective targeting of Ciita PIV in 
peripheral tissues abrogates class II MHC expression by murine FLS but does not 
protect against inflammation and autoimmune responses in CIA.
