(R)-N-(3-(6-(4-(1,4-dimethyl-3-oxopiperazin-2-yl)phenylamino)-4-methyl-5-oxo-4,5-dihydropyrazin-2-yl)-2-methylphenyl)-4,5,6,7-tetrahydrobenzo[b]thiophene-2-carboxamide 
(GDC-0834) is a potent and selective inhibitor of Bruton's tyrosine kinase 
(BTK), investigated as a potential treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. In vitro 
metabolite identification studies in hepatocytes revealed predominant formation 
of an inactive metabolite (M1) via amide hydrolysis in human. The formation of 
M1 appeared to be NADPH-independent in human liver microsomes. M1 was found in 
only minor to moderate quantities in plasma from preclinical species dosed with 
GDC-0834. Human clearance predictions using various methodologies resulted in 
estimates ranging from low to high. In addition, GDC-0834 exhibited low 
clearance in PXB chimeric mice with humanized liver. Uncertainty in human 
pharmacokinetic prediction and high interest in a BTK inhibitor for clinical 
evaluation prompted an investigational new drug strategy, in which GDC-0834 was 
rapidly advanced to a single-dose human clinical trial. GDC-0834 plasma 
concentrations in humans were below the limit of quantitation (<1 ng/ml) in most 
samples from the cohorts dosed orally at 35 and 105 mg. In contrast, substantial 
plasma concentrations of M1 were observed. In human plasma and urine, only M1 
and its sequential metabolites were identified. The formation kinetics of M1 was 
evaluated in rat, dog, monkey, and human liver microsomes in the absence of 
NADPH. The maximum rate of M1 formation (V(max)) was substantially higher in 
human compared with that in other species. In contrast, the Michaelis-Menten 
constant (K(m)) was comparable among species. Intrinsic clearance (V(max)/K(m)) 
of GDC-0834 from M1 formation in human was 23- to 169-fold higher than observed 
in rat, dog, and monkey.
