Search for a novel anti-inflammatory agent from a herbal source, such as 
Eupatorium adenophorum Spreng., a plant from the Eastern Himalayas, is of prime 
interest in the present investigation. Inflammation causes tissue destruction 
and development of diseases such as asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and so forth. 
The ethanolic leaf extract of E. adenophorum (EEA) was administered 
intravenously and in other cases topically at the site of delayed type 
hypersensitivity (DTH) reaction in mouse foot paw induced with 
dinitrofluorobenzene. EEA can effectively inhibit DTH reaction and bring back 
normalcy to the paw much earlier than the controls. Efficacy of EEA on 
regulatory mechanisms for inflammation has also been considered. Intravenous 
administration of EEA increased the number of CD4(+) T cells in spleen and tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF)-α in serum of DTH mice. Initially it was difficult to 
reconcile with the anti-inflammatory role of EEA and simultaneous induction of 
TNF-α, an established pro-inflammatory cytokine. EEA induces higher expression 
of TNF-α gene and amount of the cytokine in serum. We discussed the other role 
of TNF-α, its involvement in repairing tissue damage incurred in course of 
inflammatory reaction. EEA also induces TGF-β encoding a cytokine involved in 
tissue repair mechanism. EEA inhibits expression of another pro-inflammatory 
cytokine gene IL-1β and downregulates cycloxygenase 2 (COX2) gene responsible 
for metabolism of inflammatory mediators like prostaglandins. Furthermore, 
anti-inflammatory role of EEA is also revealed through its inhibition of 
hydroxyl radical generation. Notably EEA does not necessarily affect the 
expression of other inflammation-related genes such as IL-6, IL-10 and IKK. The 
present study reports and analyzes for the first time the anti-inflammatory 
property of the leaf extract of E. adenophorum.
