INTRODUCTION: Beyond their decades of long use as broad-spectrum antibiotics, 
tetracyclines and their derivatives have been shown to exhibit non-antimicrobial 
properties including their ability to interact with matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMP), tissue inhibitors of MMPs, growth factors and cytokines. As such, they 
are capable of affecting inflammation, immunomodulation, cell proliferation, and 
angiogenesis. Although they have been used to treat a variety of conditions 
including acne, cutaneous sarcoid, and rheumatoid arthritis, amongst others, 
their use in treating ophthalmologic disease is in its infancy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature review on the role of non-antimicrobial 
properties of tetracyclines, semisynthetic tetracyclines, and chemically 
modified non-antibacterial tetracyclines (CMTs) and their clinical properties 
was performed. The effects of these compounds in relation to ophthalmic disease 
are presented.
RESULTS: Due to their non-antimicrobial properties, tetracyclines and their 
derivatives are capable of influencing a wide variety of ocular diseases in 
animal models. By affecting expression of MMP-9 and tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-Î±, these compounds decrease corneal permeability, improve corneal 
smoothness, and reduce meibomian gland dysfunction; this improves the tear film 
which in turn restores the optical quality of the tear film and cornea. Sterile 
corneal ulceration may be inhibited via anticollagenase activity; this has been 
demonstrated in both animal models and case reports. CMTs suppress 
cataractogenesis in a diabetic rat model, possibly by affecting MMPs. With 
respect to retinal disease, tetracyclines can inhibit both microglial-mediated 
cell death and retinal cell apoptosis as well as prevent retinal capillary 
damage via caspase inhibition thus preventing retinal neovascularization. 
Experimental choroidal neovascularization is reduced by inhibition of MMP-2 and 
MMP-9, elevation of pigment epithelial derived growth factor (PEDF), and 
reduction of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression via Fas 
ligand.
DISCUSSION: Due to their non-antimicrobial properties, tetracyclines and their 
derivatives are capable of influencing a wide variety of ocular disease in 
animal models. Research suggests that they are able to reduce inflammation in 
the eyelid meibomian glands, improve optical clarity of the cornea, retard 
cataract formation, and limit ocular angiogenesis. They may have a role in 
treating the leading causes of vision loss: cataract, age-related macular 
degeneration, and diabetic retinopathy, all of which are anticipated to increase 
in incidence due to the aging population.
CONCLUSIONS: Tetracyclines, semisynthetic tetracyclines, and CMTs may have a 
role in the treatment of several important ophthalmologic diseases; however, 
further research is required, including prospective multicenter clinical trials.
