Pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines play critical roles in autoimmune 
diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Recently, it has been reported 
that β-arrestin 1 and 2 are involved in the regulation of inflammation. We 
hypothesized that β-arrestin 1 and 2 play critical roles in murine models of RA. 
Using a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and a human TNFα transgenic (TNFtg) 
mouse model, we demonstrated that β-arrestin 1 and 2 expression are 
significantly increased in joint tissue of CIA mice and TNFtg mice. In 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) isolated from hind knee joint of CIA mice, we 
observed an increase of β-arrestin 1 and 2 protein and mRNA levels in the early 
stage of arthritis. In FLS, low molecular weight hyaluronan (HA)-induced TNFα 
and IL-6 production was increased by overexpression of β-arrestin 1 but 
decreased by overexpression of β-arrestin 2 demonstrating isoform specific 
regulation. TNFα and HA induced an increase of β-arrestin 1 and 2 expression in 
FLS, while high mobility group box (HMGB)-1 only stimulated β-arrestin 1 
expression. TNFα- or HA-induced β-arrestin 2 expression was blocked by a p38 
inhibitor. To examine the in vivo role of β-arrestin 2 in the pathogenesis of 
arthritis, WT and β-arrestin 2 KO mice were subjected to collagen 
antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA). β-Arrestin 2 KO mice exhibited more severe 
arthritis in CAIA. Thus β-arrestin 2 is anti-inflammatory in CAIA. These 
composite observations suggest that β-arrestin 1 and 2 differentially regulate 
FLS inflammation and increased β-arrestin 2 may reduce experimental arthritis 
severity.
