OBJECTIVE: T cell protein tyrosine phosphatase (TC-PTP) is an important 
regulator of hematopoiesis and cytokine signaling. Recently, several genome-wide 
association studies have identified single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 
the locus of TC-PTP that are associated with rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis, among other autoimmune diseases. The aim of this study was 
to evaluate the effect of TC-PTP deficiency on the bone and joint environment 
using a knockout mouse model.
METHODS: Radiographic and micro-computed tomography analyses were performed on 
femurs of 3-week-old mice. In addition, the femorotibial joints were assessed by 
histology, flow cytometry, and cytokine detection.
RESULTS: Deficiency of TC-PTP resulted in decreased bone volume as well as an 
increase in osteoclast density within the mouse femurs. In addition, synovitis, 
characterized by infiltration of mixed inflammatory cell types and 
proinflammatory cytokines, developed in the knee joints of TC-PTP(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate that loss of TC-PTP expression results in 
synovitis with several hallmarks of inflammatory arthritis. The inflammatory 
environment observed in the knee joints of TC-PTP(-/-) mice differs from the 
systemic inflammation previously described in these mice and merits further 
research into the role of TC-PTP in the synovium. Furthermore, the results 
support recently described associations between SNPs in the TC-PTP locus and 
arthritis incidence.
