OBJECTIVE: Cadherin 11 is a homophilic cell-to-cell adhesion molecule expressed 
on joint synovial fibroblasts. Absence of cadherin 11 in a mouse rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) model led to striking reductions in cartilage erosion. Matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes expressed by synovial fibroblasts 
important for cartilage erosion. The objective of this study was to determine if 
synovial fibroblast MMP production is regulated by cadherin 11.
METHODS: To mimic cadherin 11 engagement, human RA synovial fibroblasts were 
stimulated with a chimeric construct consisting of the cadherin 11 extracellular 
domain linked to the human IgG1 Fc domain (Cad-11-Fc). Effects on MMP production 
were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, quantitative reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis, and immunoblotting.
RESULTS: Human Cad-11-Fc up-regulated MMP-1 and MMP-3 protein production by RA 
synovial fibroblasts, both alone and in synergy with tumor necrosis factor α. 
This up-regulation required cell cadherin 11 engagement, since a mutant 
Cad-11-Fc with reduced binding affinity stimulated significantly less MMP 
production. Also, short hairpin RNA (shRNA) cadherin 11 silencing almost 
completely inhibited Cad-11-Fc-induced MMP expression. Cad-11-Fc stimulation 
increased RA synovial fibroblast MMP messenger RNA levels. It also increased the 
phosphorylation of the MAPKs JNK, ERK, and p38 kinase, the phosphorylation of 
NF-κB p65, and the nuclear translocation of activator protein 1 transcription 
factor. MAPK and NF-κB inhibitors partially blocked RA synovial fibroblast MMP 
expression.
CONCLUSION: Cadherin 11 engagement stimulates increased synthesis of several 
MMPs by RA synovial fibroblasts in a MAPK- and NF-κB-dependent manner. These 
results underscore the existence of a pathway by which cadherin 11 regulates MMP 
production and has important implications for joint destruction in RA.
