INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic autoimmune disease characterised 
by inflammation of joints with cartilage and bone destruction leading to 
progressive disability. While the cause of rheumatoid arthritis is not known and 
the disease cannot be cured, conventional disease modifying antirheumatic drugs 
and biologicals are effective treatments for many patients. However, new 
therapies are needed in order to achieve better relief from rheumatoid arthritis 
symptoms than currently possible and to fully prevent joint damage. 
18β-Glycyrrhetinic acid is not only used frequently in traditional Chinese 
medicine, but has been reported to target some of the inflammatory mediators 
involved in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Moreover, it has been 
reported that liquorice, which contains high levels of 18β-Glycyrrhetinic acid, 
reduces inflammation and articular damage in collagen induced arthritis. 
Therefore, we studied the effects of 18β-Glycyrrhetinic acid in a Tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF) dependent mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: HTNFtg mice were treated with 18ß-Glycyrrhetinic acid from 
day 28 after birth every second or third day for 2 weeks, or 3 times a week for 
six weeks. TNF inhibitor treated animals served as positive control.
RESULTS: Clinical scores of arthritis were not altered in animals treated with 
18β-Glycyrrhetinic acid compared to placebo treated animals. Histological data 
also indicate no effects of 18β-Glycyrrhetinic acid on inflammatory joint 
destruction. TNF inhibitors, however markedly reduced not only clinical signs of 
TNF triggered joint inflammation but also histological signs of erosive disease. 
Therefore, in contrast to previous reports our data indicate that 
18β-Glycyrrhetinic acid does not provide a new therapeutic option for treating 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
