OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the mechanisms involved in cartilage damage in an 
experimental model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by specifically addressing the 
time course of extracellular matrix degradation and the contribution of 
cell-matrix interactions for initiation and perpetuation of this process.
METHODS: The human tumour necrosis factor (TNF) transgenic (hTNFtg) mouse model 
of RA was used to analyse the time course of pannus attachment to the cartilage 
and cartilage destruction, respectively, and crossed hTNFtg mice with 
interleukin (IL)-1(-/-) animals were used to investigate the role of IL-1 on 
these TNF-induced mechanisms in vivo. In addition, an in vitro attachment assay 
using synovial fibroblasts (SFs) from hTNFtg mice and freshly isolated articular 
cartilage was used to determine the role of proteoglycan loss in attachment of 
SFs and the role of the transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan syndecan-4.
RESULTS: In vivo analyses of hTNFtg mice showed that proteoglycan loss induced 
by IL-1 precedes and constitutes an important prerequisite for these processes 
as, in hTNFtg mice, IL-1 deficiency protected from the loss of cartilage 
proteoglycans and almost completely prevented the attachment and subsequent 
invasion of inflamed synovial tissue into cartilage. In vitro studies confirmed 
that loss of cartilage proteoglycans is required for attachment of SFs and that 
syndecan-4 is prominently involved in SF attachment and activation.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study suggest that the loss of cartilage 
proteoglycans is an early event in the course of destructive arthritis that 
facilitates the attachment of the inflamed synovial membrane and also initiates 
matrix degradation and inflammation through cell-matrix interactions.
