OBJECTIVE: To show that a new recombinant protein (MT07) obtained by fusing a 
synovial-homing peptide to a neutralizing antibody to C5 can be selectively 
delivered to inflamed synovium and can effectively control joint inflammation in 
experimental models of arthritis.
METHODS: Binding of MT07 to human, rat, and mouse synovial tissue was evaluated 
in vitro by immunofluorescence, and selective localization in the inflamed 
joints of rats was documented in vivo using time-domain optical imaging. The 
antiinflammatory effect of MT07 was tested in a rat model of antigen-induced 
arthritis (AIA) and in a mouse model of collagen antibody-induced arthritis 
(CAIA).
RESULTS: MT07 was able to bind to samples of inflamed synovium from humans, 
mice, and rats while failing to recognize uninflamed synovium as well as 
inflamed mouse lung or rat kidney. In vivo analysis of the biodistribution of 
MT07 confirmed its preferential homing to inflamed joints, with negligible 
inhibition of circulating C5 levels. MT07 prevented and resolved established 
inflammation in a rat model of AIA, as demonstrated by changes in joint 
swelling, polymorphonuclear cell counts in synovial washes, release of 
interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor Î±, and tissue damage. A similar 
therapeutic effect was obtained testing MT07 in a CAIA model.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show that the novel recombinant molecule MT07 has the 
unique ability to selectively target inflamed joints and to exert local control 
of the inflammatory process by neutralizing the complement system without 
interfering with circulating C5 levels. We believe that this approach can be 
extended to other antiinflammatory drugs currently used to treat patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis.
