INTRODUCTION: Osteoclastogenesis plays an important role in the bone erosion of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Recently, Notch receptors have been implicated in the 
development of osteoclasts. However, the responsible Notch ligands have not been 
identified yet. This study was undertaken to determine the role of individual 
Notch receptors and ligands in osteoclastogenesis.
METHODS: Mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages or human peripheral blood 
monocytes were used as osteoclast precursors and cultured with receptor 
activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL) and macrophage-colony 
stimulating factor (M-CSF) to induce osteoclasts. Osteoclasts were detected by 
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining. K/BxN serum-induced 
arthritic mice and ovariectomized mice were treated with anti-mouse Delta-like 1 
(Dll1) blocking monoclonal antibody (mAb).
RESULTS: Blockade of a Notch ligand Dll1 with mAb inhibited osteoclastogenesis 
and, conversely, immobilized Dll1-Fc fusion protein enhanced it in both mice and 
humans. In contrast, blockade of a Notch ligand Jagged1 enhanced 
osteoclastogenesis and immobilized Jagged1-Fc suppressed it. Enhancement of 
osteoclastogenesis by agonistic anti-Notch2 mAb suggested that Dll1 promoted 
osteoclastogenesis via Notch2, while suppression by agonistic anti-Notch1 mAb 
suggested that Jagged1 suppressed osteoclastogenesis via Notch1. Inhibition of 
Notch signaling by a gamma-secretase inhibitor suppressed osteoclastogenesis, 
implying that Notch2/Dll1-mediated enhancement was dominant. Actually, blockade 
of Dll1 ameliorated arthritis induced by K/BxN serum transfer, reduced the 
number of osteoclasts in the affected joints and suppressed ovariectomy-induced 
bone loss.
CONCLUSIONS: The differential regulation of osteoclastogenesis by Notch2/Dll1 
and Notch1/Jagged1 axes may be a novel target for amelioration of bone erosion 
in RA patients.
