Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune synovitis characterized by the 
formation of pannus and the destruction of cartilage and bone in the synovial 
joints. Although immune cells, which infiltrate the pannus and promote 
inflammation, play a prominent role in the pathogenesis of RA, other cell types 
also contribute. Proliferation of synovial fibroblasts, for example, underlies 
the formation of the pannus, while proliferation of endothelial cells results in 
neovascularization, which supports the growth of the pannus by supplying it with 
nutrients and oxygen. The synovial fibroblasts also promote inflammation in the 
synovium by producing cytokines and chemokines. Finally, osteoclasts cause the 
destruction of bone. In this study, we show that erlotinib, an inhibitor of the 
tyrosine kinase epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), reduces the severity of 
established collagen-induced arthritis, a mouse model of RA, and that it does so 
by targeting synovial fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and osteoclasts. 
Erlotinib-induced attenuation of autoimmune arthritis was associated with a 
reduction in number of osteoclasts and blood vessels, and erlotinib inhibited 
the formation of murine osteoclasts and the proliferation of human endothelial 
cells in vitro. Erlotinib also inhibited the proliferation and cytokine 
production of human synovial fibroblasts in vitro. Moreover, EGFR was highly 
expressed and activated in the synovium of mice with collagen-induced arthritis 
and patients with RA. Taken together, these findings suggest that EGFR plays a 
central role in the pathogenesis of RA and that EGFR inhibition may provide 
benefits in the treatment of RA.
