BACKGROUND: Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an angiogenic growth 
factor that plays a critical role in several diseases, including cancer, 
rheumatoid arthritis and diseases of the eye. Persistent regulation of VEGF by 
expression of small interfering RNAs targeting VEGF represents a potential 
future strategy for treatment of such diseases. As a step toward this goal, the 
present study combines the potency of VEGF-targeted miRNA mimics, produced from 
a miRNA cluster, with delivery by adeno-associated virus (AAV)-based vectors.
METHODS: Nine different engineered tri-cistronic miRNA clusters encoding 
anti-VEGF effectors were generated and tested in adult human retinal pigment 
epithelial (ARPE-19) cells using Renilla luciferase screening, quantitative 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), western blotting and 
immunostaining analysis. In vivo efficacy was tested by the injection of 
scAAV2/8 vectors expressing the most effective miRNA cluster into murine 
hindlimb muscles, followed by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Plasmids containing anti-VEGF miRNA clusters showed efficient silencing 
of VEGF and demonstrated a combined gene silencing effect for miRNA clusters 
composed of multiple miRNA-mimicked RNA interference effectors. The most potent 
molecule, miR-5,10,7, resulted in a knockdown of VEGF by approximately 75%. 
Injection of scAAV2/8 vectors expressing miR-5,10,7 into murine hindlimb 
muscles, resulted in a 44% reduction of endogenous VEGF.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed miRNA clusters encoding anti-VEGF effectors and 
shown, in a mouse model, that VEGF is efficiently down-regulated by 
scAAV2/8-delivered miRNA clusters, allowing potent attenuation of VEGF. These 
findings may contribute to the development of gene therapy based on AAV-mediated 
delivery of miRNA clusters.
