OBJECTIVE: From an immunologic standpoint, the mechanisms by which treatment 
with tocilizumab (TCZ), a humanized anti-interleukin-6 (anti-IL-6) receptor 
antibody, results in improvement in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients are still 
not fully understood. In vitro studies and studies in mouse models have 
demonstrated the critical role of IL-6 in Th17 cell differentiation. Th17 
lymphocytes have been shown to be strongly involved in RA pathogenesis, and the 
purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of IL-6 blockade on the 
balance between Th17 cells and Treg cells in patients with active RA.
METHODS: Patients with active RA for whom TCZ had been prescribed by a 
rheumatologist were enrolled in this study. Phenotypic analyses of T cell 
populations were performed, and the Disease Activity Score in 28 joints (DAS28) 
was assessed. Serum cytokine levels and other parameters of inflammation were 
measured before the first infusion and after the third infusion of TCZ (8 
mg/kg).
RESULTS: Compared to controls, levels of Th17 cells (CD4+IL-17+) were increased 
and Treg cells (CD4+CD25(high) FoxP3+) were decreased in the peripheral blood of 
patients with active RA. The suppressive function of circulating Treg cells was 
not impaired in patients with active RA. TCZ treatment induced a significant 
decrease in the DAS28 associated with a significant decrease in the percentage 
of Th17 cells (from a median of 0.9% to 0.45%; P = 0.009) and an increase in the 
percentage of Treg cells (from a median of 3.05% to 3.94%; P = 0.0039) in all 
patients.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates for the first time that inhibition of IL-6 
function by TCZ corrects the imbalance between Th17 cells and Treg cells in 
patients with RA.
