Antibodies specific for bovine type II collagen (CII) and Fcγ receptors play a 
major role in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Our aim was to clarify the mechanism of immune complex-mediated 
inflammation and modulation of the disease. CII pre-immunized DBA/1 mice were 
intravenously boosted with extravidin coupled biotinylated monomeric CII-peptide 
epitope (ARGLTGRPGDA) and its complexes with biotinylated FcγRII/III specific 
single chain Fv (scFv) fragment. Disease scores were monitored, antibody titers 
and cytokines were determined by ELISA, and binding of complexes was detected by 
flow cytometry and immune histochemistry. Cytokine and chemokine secretion was 
monitored by protein profiler microarray. When intravenously administered into 
collagen-primed DBA/1 mice, both CII-peptide and its complex with 2.4G2 scFv 
significantly accelerated CIA and increased the severity of the disease, whereas 
the monomeric peptide and monomeric 2.4G2 scFv had no effect. FcγRII/III 
targeted CII-peptide complexes bound to marginal zone macrophages and dendritic 
cells, and significantly elevated the synthesis of peptide-specific IgG2a. 
Furthermore, CII-peptide containing complexes augmented the in vivo secretion of 
cytokines, including IL-10, IL-12, IL-17, IL-23, and chemokines (CXCL13, MIP-1, 
MIP-2). These data indicate that complexes formed by the CII-peptide epitope 
aggravate CIA by inducing the secretion of chemokines and the IL-12/23 family of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines. Taken together, these results suggest that the in 
vivo emerging immune complexes formed with autoantigen(s) may trigger the 
IL-12/23 dependent pathways, escalating the inflammation in RA. Thus blockade of 
these cytokines may be beneficial to downregulate immune complex-induced 
inflammation in autoimmune arthritis.
