Chronic pain has profound effects on activity. Previous reports indicate chronic 
inflammatory conditions result in reduced activity which normalizes upon pain 
treatment. However, there is little systematic investigation of this process. 
Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disorder that causes significant joint 
pain. The K/BxN serum transfer mouse has been characterized as a model for 
rheumatoid arthritis and chronic pain. We investigated the activity of mice 
following K/BxN serum transfer vs. control serum and observed the activity 
changes following delivery of an NSAID, ketorolac. Previous studies have used 
running wheels and laser beams to monitor activity; we chose to validate a model 
using cost-effective infrared sensors on individual cages. Each mouse had its 
baseline activity obtained, which showed significant variation between 
individual C57Bl/6 mice. Arthritic mice had significantly decreased activity for 
only the first 11 nights. Conversely, previous work has shown that these animals 
display tactile allodynia that persists for at least 45 days. Mice were treated 
with ketorolac in their drinking water (10mg/kg, 15mg/kg, or 20mg/kg) for nights 
6-8. The two highest doses showed significant normalization of activity levels. 
Four nights after ketorolac was stopped, treated animals were still 
significantly more active than control. The reversal of the reduced activity 
provides support that the depression relates to the arthritic pain state of the 
animal. These results indicate the efficacy of activity monitoring to better 
investigate behavior in persistent pain states. However, insofar as depressed 
activity reflects pain and disability, the present work raises questions as to 
the relevance of the tactile thresholds in defining behaviorally relevant pain 
states.
