The aim of this study was to investigate if transfusion of mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSC) could exhibit beneficial effects on rheumatoid arthritis. Human bone 
marrow MSC were intraperitoneally injected into Wistar rats with 
collagen-induced arthritis at a dose of 10(7) on the next day (preventive group) 
or 2 weeks (treatment group) after collagen II induction, once a week for 2 
weeks (preventive group) or 4 weeks (treatment group). The control group was 
given normal saline (NS) at corresponding time. The symptom scorings were 
documented weekly from the second week of the induction. On week 6, the hind 
joints of the rats were pathologically examined and the activation status of 
splenocytes was analyzed by flow cytometry. The results showed that all the rats 
developed arthritis and subsequent joint abnormality. On the sixth week, symptom 
scores of the rats that received MSC preventive (9.5 ± 0.5) or therapeutic (9.4 
± 0.6) infusions had no significant difference between each other, but were 
significantly greater than those of the NS controls (7.6 ± 0.6, P < 0.05). 
Consistently, pathological examination on the involved knees showed that the 
synovitis and arthritis scorings of MSC treated rats were greatly elevated 
compared with NS controls. Furthermore, the ratios of CD86(+) cells in the 
spleens of MSC prevention, MSC treatment and NS control groups were (4.16 ± 
1.48), (4.06 ± 1.97) and (4.15 ± 2.04) respectively, while those of 
CD11b/c(+)CD86(+) cells were (1.04 ± 0.68), (0.95 ± 0.56) and (0.98 ± 0.44), all 
of which were significantly higher than those of healthy controls [(0.97 ± 0.18) 
and (0.30 ± 0.17), P < 0.05 for both parameters]. It is concluded that MSC 
infusion has little beneficial effects on collagen-induced arthritis in rats, 
conversely, MSC therapy aggravated the damage of the involved joints, its 
underlying mechanisms need to be further investigated.
