Rheumatoid arthritis is characterized by the imbalance of T cells, which leads 
to increased pro-inflammatory and reduced anti-inflammatory cytokines. 
Modulating the balance among T cells is crucial for the treatment of RA. Kirenol 
is a major diterpenoid components of Herba Siegesbeckiae, which has been applied 
for arthritic therapy for centuries. Since prior research showed Kirenol 
exhibited anti-inflammatory effect in rats, in this study we have evaluated the 
effect and mechanism of bioactive Kirenol in a rat model of collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) on modulation of T cells. After immunization with bovine type II 
collagen (CII), Wistar rats were orally administered saline (CIA group), 2 mg/kg 
Kirenol or 2 mg/kg prednisolone daily for 30 days. The severity of arthritis was 
clinically and histologically assessed. The numbers of CD4⁺CD25⁺Foxp3⁺ T 
regulatory cells (Tregs) and IFNγ⁺CD4⁺ and IL4⁺CD4⁺ T cells were determined by 
flow cytometry, the mRNA expression level of Foxp3 was quantified by RT-PCR, 
cytokine levels were measured by ELISA and CII-induced cell proliferation was 
quantified in vitro. Kirenol significantly delayed the occurrence and reduced 
the disease severity of CIA. Histological analysis confirmed Kirenol suppressed 
joint inflammation and inhibited cartilage and bone destruction, compared to the 
CIA group. Kirenol also upregulated the mRNA expression of Foxp3, increased the 
numbers of CD4⁺CD25⁺Foxp3⁺ and IL4⁺CD4⁺ T cells, and reduced the number of 
IFNγ⁺CD4⁺ T cells. Kirenol reduced the levels of TNF-α, IL-17A and IL-6 in 
synovial fluid and TNF-α, IL-17A and IFN-γ in serum, and increased the serum 
levels of IL-4, IL-10 and TGF-β1. In addition, Kirenol inhibited the ability of 
CII to induce splenocyte, PBMC and lymph node cell proliferation in vitro, 
compared to cells from CIA rats. In conclusion, these results suggest that 
Kirenol may be a potential immunosuppressant for the treatment for rheumatoid 
arthritis.
