The aim of the study was to determine the effect of alendronate on resorption of 
β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP) and bone formation in rats with adjuvant-induced 
arthritis (AIA). After preparation of a model of AIA in rats (day 0), 
alendronate or vehicle was injected intraperitoneally once daily five times in a 
week. Cylindrical β-TCP was implanted into the rat femoral condyle on day 7. 
Rats were killed on days 12, 15, and 21, and specimens and serum samples were 
collected. Specimens were analyzed by tartrate-resistant acid phosphate (TRAP) 
staining, immunohistochemistry of the ED1 protein, and in situ hybridization 
with digoxigenin-labeled α1 chain of type I procollagen (COL1A1). Mineralized 
bone sections were analyzed by Villanueva bone stain. The serum osteocalcin 
level was measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit. Alendronate 
decreased the number of TRAP-positive cells attached to β-TCP, the numbers of 
ED1-positive multinucleated giant cells, and resorption of β-TCP. In AIA rats 
treated with alendronate, COL1A1 mRNA-positive cells adhered to β-TCP were round 
or cuboid whereas the cells in untreated AIA rats were fibroblast-like cells. 
Alendronate increased calcification of newly formed bone whereas it did not 
restore the bone formation suppressed with inflammation. These results suggest 
that alendronate has the potential to conduct mature bone after implantation of 
β-TCP in AIA. Alendronate may help to reduce insufficiency of newly formed bone 
after implantation of β-TCP in diseases characterized by increased bone 
resorption such as rheumatoid arthritis.
