AIMS: This study aimed to assess the beneficial effects of the concurrent 
administration of cilostazol and methotrexate (MTX) on the synovial fibroblasts 
obtained from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and in a mouse model of 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
MAIN METHODS: Production of TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6 and MCP-1 on synovial fibroblasts 
from RA patients was determined by RT-PCR. Cell proliferation, viability and 
apoptosis were measured. Anti-arthritic effects were evaluated in CIA mice.
KEY FINDING: Concurrent use of cilostazol and MTX effectively suppressed 
proliferation and cell viability associated with enhanced apoptosis of synovial 
fibroblasts and significantly suppressed cytokine production, including TNF-α, 
IL-1β, IL-6, and MCP-1 in an additive manner. In line with these findings, 
LPS-induced increased expression of NURR1 mRNA and protein were suppressed by 
cilostazol and MTX in accordance with suppression of NF-κB p65 activity. These 
suppressed effects were reversed by KT5720 (cAMP-protein kinase inhibitor) and 
ZM 241385 (A(2A) receptor antagonist), respectively. In CIA mice, treatment with 
cilostazol, MTX and their combination significantly decreased clinical signs 
with improvement of histopathological status in the paw of mice, accompanied by 
reduced serum cytokine levels. Likewise, following concurrent administration, 
CD68 (+)-cell recruitment, proteoglycan depletion and osteoclast formation were 
significantly suppressed in association with repressed RANKL expression in the 
joints of CIA mice.
SIGNIFICANCE: In conclusion, a combination of cilostazol and MTX may provide an 
effective therapeutic strategy for the suppression of inflammation and the 
prevention of joint damage in RA via activation of the cAMP-dependent protein 
kinase in the synovial fibroblasts.
