Hydrocarbon oils such as pristane or hexadecane induce arthritis and lupus in 
rodents sharing clinical and pathological features with the human diseases 
rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus, respectively. In 
pristane-induced lupus in the mouse induction of apoptosis and augmentation of 
type-I Interferon signalling by pristane have been suggested to contribute to 
pathology, whereas in pristane-induced arthritis (PIA) in the rat the 
pathological mechanisms are still elusive. Here we show that pristane induces 
cell death in rat and human cells. Increased numbers of apoptotic cells were 
found in draining lymph nodes of pristane-injected rats and increased 
percentages of apoptotic and necrotic cells were observed in peripheral blood. 
In addition, neutrophil extracellular trap formation was triggered by pristane 
and hexadecane in neutrophils. Because levels of interleukin (IL)-1β were 
elevated in sera of pristane-injected rats, with levels mirroring the course of 
PIA, we examined the effect of pristane at single cell level in vitro, using rat 
splenocytes and the human monocytic cell line THP-1. Pristane and other 
hydrocarbon oils induced IL-1β secretion in THP-1 cells as well as in rat 
splenocytes. The potassium channel inhibitor glibenclamide partly inhibited 
IL-1β induction, suggesting involvement of the inflammasome. Elevated levels of 
IL-1α were also found in supernatants of cells treated with pristane and 
hexadecane. In conclusion, autoimmunogenic hydrocarbon oils induce various forms 
of cell death in rat and human cells. The higher serum IL-1β levels in 
pristane-injected animals might be caused by both inflammasome-dependent and 
-independent mechanisms, such as passive release from dying-cells and probably 
extracellular maturation of pro-IL-1β.
