BACKGROUND: Substantial advances have been generated in understanding the 
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Current murine models of RA-like 
disease have provided great insights into the molecular mechanism of 
inflammatory arthritis due to the use of genetically deficient or transgenic 
mice. However, these studies are limited by differences that exist between human 
and murine immune systems. Thus, the development of an animal model that 
utilizes human immune cells, will afford the opportunity to study their function 
in the initiation and propagation of inflammatory arthritis.
METHODS: One to two-day old irradiated NOD-scid IL2rÎ³(null) (NSG) mice were 
reconstituted with human CD34+ cord blood stem cells. Leukocytes were analyzed 
by flow cytometry and circulating antibodies were determined by ELISA. Arthritis 
was induced by injecting complete Freund's adjuvant into knee or ankle joints. 
Mice were also treated with the TNF inhibitor, Etanercept, or PBS and joints 
were analyzed histologically.
RESULTS: Humanized mice were established with high reconstitution rates and were 
able to spontaneously produce human immunoglobulins as well as specific IgG in 
response to immunization. Intraperitoneal injection of thioglycolate or 
injection of complete Freund's adjuvant into joints resulted in migration of 
human immune cells to the injected sites. Arthritic humanized mice treated with 
Etanercept had markedly less inflammation, which was associated with decreased 
total numbers of human CD45+ cells, including human lymphocytes and neutrophils.
CONCLUSIONS: The humanized mouse model is a new model to study inflammatory 
arthritis disease using human leukocytes without rejection of engrafted tissue. 
Future studies may adapt this system to incorporate RA patient cord blood and 
develop a chimeric animal model of inflammatory arthritis using genetically 
predisposed immune cells.
