Oxygen metabolism has an important role in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid 
arthritis. A certain correlation was observed between oxidative stress, 
arthritis and the immune system. Reactive oxygen species produced in the course 
of cellular oxidative phosphorylation and by activated phagocytic cells during 
oxidative burst, exceed the physiological buffering capacity and result in 
oxidative stress. The excessive production of ROS can damage protein, lipids, 
nucleic acids, and matrix components. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis have an 
altered antioxidant defense capacity barrier. In the present study the effect of 
substances with antioxidative properties, i.e. pinosylvin and carnosine, was 
determined in monotherapy for the treatment of adjuvant arthritis (AA). Moreover 
carnosine was evaluated in combination therapy with methotrexate. Rats with AA 
were administered first pinosylvin (30 mg/kg body mass daily per os), second 
carnosine (150 mg/kg body mass daily per os) in monotherapy for a period of 28 
days. Further, rats with AA were administered methotrexate (0.3 mg/kg body mass 
2-times weekly per os), and a combination of methotrexate+carnosine, with the 
carnosine dose being the same as in the previous experiment. Parameters, i.e. 
changes in hind paw volume and arthritic score were determined in rats as 
indicators of destructive arthritis-associated clinical changes. Plasmatic 
levels of TBARS and lag time of Fe(2+)-induced lipid peroxidation (tau-FeLP) in 
plasma and brain were specified as markers of oxidation. Plasmatic level of CRP 
and activity of Î³-glutamyltransferase (GGT) in spleen and joint were used as 
inflammation markers. In comparison to pinosylvin, administration of carnosine 
monotherapy led to a significant decrease in the majority of the parameters 
studied. In the combination treatment with methotrexate+carnosine most 
parameters monitored were improved more remarkably than by methotrexate alone. 
Carnosine can increase the disease-modifying effect of methotrexate treatment in 
rat AA.
