Low-level laser therapy (LLLT) can reduce inflammation in a variety of clinical 
conditions, including trauma, postherpetic neuralgia, and rheumatoid arthritis. 
However, the effect of LLLT on internal organs has not been elucidated. The goal 
of the present study was to investigate the anti-inflammatory effect of daily 
external LLLT in an animal model of crescentic glomerulonephritis. Crescentic 
glomerulonephritis was induced in male Wister Kyoto rats by intravenous 
injection of antibody for glomerular basement membrane (GBM). The rats were 
irradiated with a low-reactive level diode laser with an infrared wavelength of 
830 nm from the shaved skin surface once a day for 14 days (irradiation spot 
size on the skin surface, 2.27 cm(2); power intensity, 880 mW/cm(2); irradiation 
mode, continuous mode; irradiation time, 250 s; energy, 500 J; energy density, 
220 J/cm(2)). After laser irradiation for 14 days, animals were killed, and the 
extent of inflammation was evaluated. Expression of gene for inflammatory 
cytokines including interleukin (IL)-1β and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) 
was assessed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Crescent 
formation in glomeruli and infiltration of macrophages and lymphocytes were 
assessed by histochemical observation. Injection of anti-GBM antibody induced 
severe glomerulonephritis with crescent formation. Histological observations 
indicated that LLLT suppressed crescent formation and infiltration of ED1+ 
macrophages and CD8+ lymphocytes into the glomeruli. LLLT attenuated the levels 
of IL-1β and TNF-α messenger RNA in the renal cortex. Externally directed LLLT 
suppresses the activity of rat anti-GBM crescentic glomerulonephritis in rats. 
LLLT has the potential to be used for direct treatment of glomerulonephritis.
