Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) comprise one of the most 
frequently used classes of medicines in the world; however, NSAIDs have 
significant side effects, such as gastroenteropathy, and rheumatoid arthritis 
patients taking NSAIDs are more susceptible to NSAID-induced gastric lesions as 
compared to patients with other diseases. In Asian countries, loxoprofen has 
been used clinically for many years as a standard NSAID. We demonstrate the 
preventive effect of the co-administration of water containing magnesium ion 
(magnesium water, 1-200 µg/kg) on the ulcerogenic response to loxoprofen in 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA) rats. Oral administration of loxoprofen 
(100 mg/kg) caused hemorrhagic lesions in the gastric mucosa of AA rats 14 d 
after adjuvant injection, and, following loxoprofen administration, the lesion 
score of AA rats was significantly higher than that of normal rats. The 
expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) mRNA and nitric oxide (NO) 
production in the gastric mucosa of AA rats were also increased by the 
administration of loxoprofen, and the increase in lesions and NO were prevented 
by the administration of aminoguanidine, an iNOS inhibitor. The 
co-administration of magnesium water decreased the ulcerogenic response to 
loxoprofen in AA rats. In addition, the co-administration of magnesium water 
attenuated the increase in iNOS mRNA expression and NO production in AA rats 
receiving loxoprofen. These results suggest that the oral co-administration of 
magnesium water to AA rats has a potent preventive effect on the ulcerogenic 
response to loxoprofen, probably by inhibiting the rise in iNOS and NO levels in 
the gastric mucosa.
