Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFα) plays a crucial role in inflammatory diseases 
such as rheumatoid arthritis and postmenopausal osteoporosis. Recently, it has 
been demonstrated that hydrogen gas, known as a novel antioxidant, can exert 
therapeutic anti-inflammatory effect in many diseases. In this study, we 
investigated the effect of treatment with hydrogen molecule (H(2)) on 
TNFα-induced cell injury in osteoblast. The osteoblasts isolated from neonatal 
rat calvariae were cultured. It was found that TNFα suppressed cell viability, 
induced cell apoptosis, suppressed Runx2 mRNA expression, and inhibited alkaline 
phosphatase activity, which was reversed by co-incubation with H(2). Incubation 
with TNFα-enhanced intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation and 
malondialdehyde production increased NADPH oxidase activity, impaired 
mitochondrial function marked by increased mitochondrial ROS formation and 
decreased mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP synthesis, and suppressed 
activities of antioxidant enzymes including SOD and catalase, which were 
restored by co-incubation with H(2). Treatment with H(2) inhibited TNFα-induced 
activation of NFκB pathway. In addition, treatment with H(2) inhibited 
TNFα-induced nitric oxide (NO) formation through inhibiting iNOS activity. 
Treatment with H(2) inhibited TNFα-induced IL-6 and ICAM-1 mRNA expression. In 
conclusion, treatment with H(2) alleviates TNFα-induced cell injury in 
osteoblast through abating oxidative stress, preserving mitochondrial function, 
suppressing inflammation, and enhancing NO bioavailability.
