Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease that 
mainly causes the synovial joint inflammation and cartilage destruction. Both 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and Interleukin-17 (IL-17) are important proinflammatory 
cytokines involved in the pathogenesis of RA. We investigated whether 
combination therapy with IL-1β and IL-17A antibodies would generate the 
potential for synergistic effects on a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse 
model. Mice with CIA were subcutaneously injected with humanized IL-1β antibody, 
IL-17A antibody, or combination treatment. The effects of treatment were 
determined by arthritis severity score, histological damage and bone 
destruction, autoreactive humoral and cellular immune responses and cytokine 
production. Treatment with IL-1β antibody or IL-17A antibody alone resulted in 
beneficial effects on clinical and histological parameters of CIA mice. Compared 
with the single antibody treatments, the combination therapy resulted in a more 
significant effect in alleviating the severity of arthritis by preventing bone 
damage and cartilage destruction, reducing humoral and cellular immune 
responses, and down-regulating the expression of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-17A, IFN-γ, 
RANKL and MMP-3 in inflammatory tissue. In conclusion, combination treatment 
with humanized IL-1β and IL-17A antibodies demonstrates synergistic beneficial 
effects for preventing joint inflammation and cartilage destruction and bone 
damage in CIA mice model. These studies also provide evidence that combination 
with IL-1β and IL-17A antibodies may lead to a new combinatorial therapy for RA 
patients.
