Polymorphism at the GPSM3 gene locus is inversely associated with four systemic 
autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis. 
G-protein signaling modulator-3 (GPSM3) expression is most pronounced in myeloid 
cells, in which it targets heterotrimeric G-protein GÎ±i subunits of chemokine 
receptors, critical to immune function. To begin to explore the regulatory role 
of GPSM3 in monocytes, human THP-1 and primary mouse myeloid cells were cultured 
under stimulus conditions; GPSM3 was found by immunoblotting to be expressed at 
highest levels in the mature monocyte. To evaluate the effects of GPSM3 
deficiency on a myeloid-dependent autoimmune disease, collagen antibody-induced 
arthritis (CAIA) was induced in Gpsm3-/- and control mice, which were then 
analyzed for clinical score, paw swelling, intra-articular proinflammatory 
markers, and histopathology. Mice lacking GPSM3 were protected from CAIA, and 
expression of monocyte-representative pro-inflammatory chemokine receptors and 
cytokines in paws of Gpsm3-/- mice were decreased. Flow cytometry, apoptosis, 
and transwell chemotaxis experiments were conducted to further characterize the 
effect of GPSM3 deficiency on survival and chemokine responsiveness of 
monocytes. GPSM3-deficient myeloid cells had reduced migration ex vivo to CCL2, 
CX3CL1, and chemerin and enhanced apoptosis in vitro. Our results suggest that 
GPSM3 is an important regulator of monocyte function involving mechanisms of 
differentiation, survival, and chemotaxis, and deficiency in GPSM3 expression is 
protective in acute inflammatory arthritis.
