A(2A) adenosine receptors (ARs) play a key role in the inhibition of the 
inflammatory process. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the modulation 
of A(2A)ARs in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients after different 
pharmacological treatments and to investigate the effect of A(2A)AR stimulation 
in a rat model of arthritis. We investigated A(2A)AR density and functionality 
in RA progression by using a longitudinal study in RA patients before and after 
methotrexate (MTX), anti-TNFÎ± agents or rituximab treatments. A(2A)ARs were 
analyzed by saturation binding assays in lymphocytes from RA patients throughout 
the 24-month study timeframe. In an adjuvant-induced arthritis model in rats we 
showed the efficacy of the A(2A)AR agonist, CGS 21680 in comparison with 
standard therapies by means of paw volume assessment, radiographic and 
ultrasonographic imaging. Arthritic-associated pain was investigated in 
mechanical allodynia and thermal hyperalgesia tests. IL-10 release following 
A(2A)AR stimulation in lymphocytes from RA patients and in serum from arthritic 
rats was measured. In lymphocytes obtained from RA patients, the A(2A)AR 
up-regulation was gradually reduced in function of the treatment time and the 
stimulation of these receptors mediated a significant increase of IL-10 
production. In the same cells, CGS 21680 did not affected cell viability and did 
not produced cytotoxic effects. The A(2A)AR agonist CGS 21680 was highly 
effective, as suggested by the marked reduction of clinical signs, in rat 
adjuvant-induced arthritis and associated pain. This study highlighted that 
A(2A)AR agonists represent a physiological-like therapeutic alternative for RA 
treatment as suggested by the anti-inflammatory role of A(2A)ARs in lymphocytes 
from RA patients. The effectiveness of A(2A)AR stimulation in a rat model of 
arthritis supported the role of A(2A)AR agonists as potential pharmacological 
treatment for RA.
