OBJECTIVE: To clarify the roles of hyaluronan (HA) in joint inflammation and the 
process of joint destruction, using 4-methylumbelliferone (4-MU), an inhibitor 
of HA synthesis, in a mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and in a 
monolayer culture of fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) derived from patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: DAB/1J mice were immunized with type II collagen. The effects of 4-MU 
were evaluated by the physiologic arthritis score, paw swelling, the histologic 
arthritis score, and expression of matrix metalloproteinase 3 (MMP-3) and MMP-13 
in chondrocytes and synovial tissue. In vitro, the effect of 4-MU on messenger 
RNA and protein expression of MMP-1 and MMP-3 was determined. The effects of 
4-MU on HA deposition and on serum/medium concentrations of HA were analyzed 
using biotinylated HA binding protein staining and an HA binding assay, 
respectively.
RESULTS: Treatment with 4-MU in mice with CIA dramatically decreased the 
severity of arthritis (based on the arthritis score), paw thickness, and 
histopathologic changes. MMP-3 and MMP-13 expression in chondrocytes and 
synovial cells was significantly inhibited by 4-MU in vivo. Treatment with 4-MU 
also inhibited MMP-1 and MMP-3 expression in tumor necrosis factor Î±-stimulated 
FLS, in a dose-dependent manner. The 4-MU-induced decreases in the serum HA 
concentration in mice with CIA and in "medium" and "pericellular" HA 
concentrations in cultured FLS support the contention that the inhibitory 
mechanism of 4-MU is mediated by HA suppression.
CONCLUSION: Reduced disease activity induced by 4-MU in mice with CIA revealed 
HA to be a crucial regulator in the course of arthritis. Therefore, 4-MU is a 
potential therapeutic agent in arthritis, and its inhibitory mechanism is 
possibly mediated by suppression of HA synthesis.
