INTRODUCTION: Detection of (subclinical) synovitis is relevant for both early 
diagnosis and monitoring of therapy of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Previously, 
the potential of imaging (sub)clinical arthritis was demonstrated by targeting 
the translocator protein in activated macrophages using (R)-[11C]PK11195 and 
positron emission tomography (PET). Images, however, also showed significant 
peri-articular background activity. The folate receptor (FR)-β is a potential 
alternative target for imaging activated macrophages. Therefore, the PET tracer 
[18F]fluoro-PEG-folate was synthesized and evaluated in both in vitro and ex 
vivo studies using a methylated BSA induced arthritis model.
METHODS: [18F]fluoro-PEG-folate was synthesized in a two-step procedure. 
Relative binding affinities of non-radioactive fluoro-PEG-folate, folic acid and 
naturally circulating 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-Me-THF) to FR were determined 
using KB cells with high expression of FR. Both in vivo [18F]fluoro-PEG-folate 
PET and ex vivo tissue distribution studies were performed in arthritic and 
normal rats and results were compared with those of the established macrophage 
tracer (R)-[11C]PK11195.
RESULTS: [18F]fluoro-PEG-folate was synthesized with a purity >97%, a yield of 
300 to 1,700 MBq and a specific activity between 40 and 70 GBq/µmol. Relative in 
vitro binding affinity for FR of F-PEG-folate was 1.8-fold lower than that of 
folic acid, but 3-fold higher than that of 5-Me-THF. In the rat model, 
[18F]fluoro-PEG-folate uptake in arthritic knees was increased compared with 
both contralateral knees and knees of normal rats. Uptake in arthritic knees 
could be blocked by an excess of glucosamine-folate, consistent with 
[18F]fluoro-PEG-folate being specifically bound to FR. Arthritic knee-to-bone 
and arthritic knee-to-blood ratios of [18F]fluoro-PEG-folate were increased 
compared with those of (R)-[11C]PK11195. Reduction of 5-Me-THF levels in rat 
plasma to those mimicking human levels increased absolute [18F]fluoro-PEG-folate 
uptake in arthritic joints, but without improving target-to-background ratios.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel PET tracer [18F]fluoro-PEG-folate, designed to target FR 
on activated macrophages provided improved contrast in a rat model of arthritis 
compared with the accepted macrophage tracer (R)-[11C]PK11195. These results 
warrant further exploration of [18F]fluoro-PEG-folate as a putative PET tracer 
for imaging (sub)clinical arthritis in RA patients.
