OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a sexually dimorphic inflammatory 
autoimmune disease with both articular and extraarticular disease 
manifestations, including RA-associated interstitial lung disease. Low levels of 
testosterone have been linked to disease severity in men with RA, and 
supplemental testosterone has been shown to improve RA symptoms in both 
postmenopausal women and men with low levels of testosterone. The mechanisms by 
which sex and sex steroids affect the immune system and autoimmunity are poorly 
understood. The purpose of this study was to examine the protective effects of 
testicular-derived sex hormones on the development of joint and lung disease in 
an autoimmune mouse model.
METHODS: Arthritis prevalence and severity were assessed in orchiectomized, 
sham-orchiectomized, and intact male SKG mice as well as in female SKG mice over 
a 12-week period after intraperitoneal injection of zymosan. Lung tissues were 
evaluated by quantifying cellular accumulation in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, 
collagen levels, and histologic changes. An antigen microarray was used to 
evaluate autoantibody generation under each experimental condition.
RESULTS: Female SKG mice developed arthritis and lung disease at increased 
prevalence and severity as compared to intact male mice. The absence of 
testosterone after orchiectomy led to increased arthritis, lung disease, and 
autoantibody generation in orchiectomized male mice as compared to intact male 
mice.
CONCLUSION: SKG mice represent an authentic sexually dimorphic mouse model of 
both the joint and lung disease seen in humans with RA. Testosterone protects 
against the development of joint and lung disease in male SKG mice.
