The CTLA4-Ig fusion proteins abatacept and belatacept are clinically proven 
immunosuppressants used for rheumatoid arthritis and renal transplant, 
respectively. Given that both biologics are typically administered chronically 
by infusion, a need exists for a next-generation CTLA4-Ig with more convenient 
dosing. We used structure-based protein engineering to optimize the affinity of 
existing CTLA4-Ig therapeutics for the ligands CD80 and CD86, and for the 
neonatal Fc receptor, FcRn. From a rationally designed library, we identified 
four substitutions that enhanced binding to human CD80 and CD86. Coupled with 
two IgG1 Fc substitutions that enhanced binding to human FcRn, these changes 
comprise the novel CTLA4-Ig fusion protein, XPro9523. Compared with abatacept, 
XPro9523 demonstrated 5.9-fold, 23-fold, and 12-fold increased binding to CD80, 
CD86, and FcRn, respectively; compared with belatacept, CD80, CD86, and FcRn 
binding increased 1.5-fold, 7.7-fold, and 11-fold, respectively. XPro9523 and 
belatacept suppressed human T cell proliferation and IL-2 production more 
potently than abatacept. XPro9523 also suppressed inflammation in the mouse 
collagen-induced arthritis model. In cynomolgus monkeys, XPro9523 saturated CD80 
and CD86 more effectively than abatacept and belatacept, potently inhibited IgM 
and IgG immunization responses, and demonstrated longer half-life. 
Pharmacokinetic modeling of its increased potency and persistence suggests that, 
in humans, XPro9523 may demonstrate superior efficacy and dosing convenience 
compared with abatacept and belatacept.
