Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease with unknown etiology 
where tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) plays a critical role. Etanercept, a 
recombinant fusion protein of human soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor II 
(hsTNFR) linked to the Fc portion of human IgG1, is used to treat RA based on 
the rationale that sTNFR binds TNFα and blocks TNFα-mediated inflammation. We 
compared hsTNFR protein delivery from genetically engineered human mesenchymal 
stem cells (hMSCs) with etanercept. Blocking TNFα-dependent intercellular 
adhesion molecule-1 expression on transduced hMSCs and inhibition of nitric 
oxide production from TNFα-treated bovine chondrocytes by conditioned culture 
media from transduced hMSCs demonstrated the functionality of the hsTNFR 
construction. Implanted hsTNFR-transduced mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) reduced 
mouse serum circulating TNFα generated from either implanted TNFα-expressing 
cells or lipopolysaccharide induction more effectively than etanercept (TNFα, 
100%; interleukin [IL]-1α, 90%; and IL-6, 60% within 6 hours), suggesting faster 
clearance of the soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor (sTNFR)-TNFα complex 
from the animals. In vivo efficacy of sTNFR-transduced MSCs was illustrated in 
two (immune-deficient and immune-competent) arthritic rodent models. In the 
antibody-induced arthritis BalbC/SCID mouse model, intramuscular injection of 
hsTNFR-transduced hMSCs reduced joint inflammation by 90% compared with 
untransduced hMSCs; in the collagen-induced arthritis Fischer rat model, both 
sTNFR-transduced rat MSCs and etanercept inhibited joint inflammation by 30%. In 
vitro chondrogenesis assays showed the ability of TNFα and IL1α, but not 
interferon γ, to inhibit hMSC differentiation to chondrocytes, illustrating an 
additional negative role for inflammatory cytokines in joint repair. The data 
support the utility of hMSCs as therapeutic gene delivery vehicles and their 
potential to be used in alleviating inflammation within the arthritic joint.
