Advancements in rheumatoid-arthritis-(RA) therapies have shown considerable 
progresses in the comprehension of disease. However, the development of new 
potential agents with relative safety and efficacy continues and natural 
compounds have been considered as alternatives to identify new entities. Since 
previous in-vivo data and our in-vitro findings showed that torilin has a strong 
anti-inflammatory property, we further investigated its effect against 
collagen-induced-arthritis-(CIA) in mice. CIA-induced DBA/1J mice were treated 
with torilin or methotrexate (MTX) for 5-weeks. Arthritis severity was evaluated 
by arthritic score and joint histopathology. Draining lymph node (dLN), joint 
and peripheral-blood mononuclear-cell (PBMC) counts, and activation/localization 
of T-/B-lymphocytes, dendritic cells (DCs) and neutrophils were examined by FACS 
analysis. Serum anti-type-II-collagen-(CII) antibody levels and 
cultured-splenocyte and serum cytokines were also evaluated. Torilin markedly 
reduced CIA-induced arthritic score, histopathology and leukocyte counts. 
Besides, torilin suppressed CIA-activated T-cells including CD3+, CD3+/CD69+, 
CD8+, CD4+ and CD4+/CD25+ in dLNs or joints. It also modified CD19+ or 
CD20+/CD23+ (B-cells), MHCII+/CD11c+ (DCs) and Gr-1+/CD11b+ (neutrophil) 
subpopulations. It further depressed total anti-CII-IgG, anti-CII-IgG1 and 
anti-CII-IgG2a antibody productions. Moreover, while IFN-γ and IL-10 were not 
affected, torilin suppressed CIA-induced serum TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-6 levels. 
Interestingly, torilin also blocked IFN-γ, IL-17 and IL-6 cytokines while it did 
not affect IL-10 but enhanced IL-4 in splenocytes. These results show that 
torilin attenuated arthritis severity, modified leukocyte activations in dLNs or 
joints, and restored serum and splenocyte cytokine imbalances. Torilin may have 
immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory properties with the capacity to 
ameliorate the inflammatory response in CIA-mice.
