BACKGROUND: The proteoglycan biglycan (BGN) is involved in collagen fibril 
assembly and its fragmentation is likely to be associated with collagen turnover 
during the pathogenesis of diseases which involve dysregulated extracellular 
matrix remodeling (ECMR), such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and liver fibrosis. 
The scope of the present study was to develop a novel enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for the measurement of a MMP-9 and MMP-12-generated 
biglycan neo-epitope and to test its biological validity in a rat model of RA 
and in two rat models of liver fibrosis, chosen as models of ECMR.
RESULTS: Biglycan was cleaved in vitro by MMP-9 and -12 and the 
344'YWEVQPATFR'353 peptide (BGM) was chosen as a potential neo-epitope. A 
technically sound competitive ELISA for the measurement of BGM was generated and 
the assay was validated in a bovine cartilage explant culture (BEX), in a 
collagen induced model of rheumatoid arthritis (CIA) and in two different rat 
models of liver fibrosis: the carbon tetrachloride (CCL4)-induced fibrosis 
model, and the bile duct ligation (BDL) model. Significant elevation in serum 
BGM was found in CIA rats compared to controls, in rats treated with CCL4 for 16 
weeks and 20 weeks compared to the control groups as well as in all groups of 
rats subject to BDL compared with sham operated groups. Furthermore, there was a 
significant correlation of serum BGM levels with the extent of liver fibrosis 
determined by the Sirius red staining of liver sections in the CCL4 model.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that the specific tissue remodeling product of 
MMPs-degraded biglycan, namely the neo-epitope BGM, is correlated with 
pathological ECMR. This assay represents both a novel marker of ECM turnover and 
a potential new tool to elucidate biglycan role during the pathological 
processes associated with ECMR.
