AIM: Besides joint destruction, extra-articular complications (outside the 
locomotor system) are frequent in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, especially 
cardiovascular, hematological and metabolic disorders. Here, we evaluated and 
compared the protective activity of two different doses of mixture of ginger and 
turmeric rhizomes powder (1 : 1) suspended in distilled water (GTaq) in 
alleviating both articular and extra-articular manifestations in rat 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA).
METHODS: Arthritis was induced by a single intra-dermal injection of 0.1 mL of 
Complete Freund's adjuvant (containing heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis) 
into the palmar surface of the left hind paw after the rats were subjected to 
light diethyl ether anesthesia. Arthritic rats received orally and daily (for 28 
consecutive days) distilled water as vehicle, indomethacin (1.0 mg/kg body 
weight), or GTaq (200 or 400 mg/kg body weight) from the day of arthritis 
induction.
RESULTS: The present study showed that GTaq (especially the high dose) was more 
effective (4.2-38.4% higher, P < 0.05-0.001) than indomethacin (a 
non-steroidal/anti-inflammatory drug) in alleviating the loss in body weight 
gain, the histopathological changes observed in ankle joints, blood leukocytosis 
and thrombocytosis, iron deficiency anemia, serum hypoalbuminemia and 
globulinemia, the impairment of kidney functions, and the risks for 
cardiovascular disease in arthritic rats. These protective effects of GTaq were 
mediated through increasing the food intake and decreasing the systemic 
inflammation that occur at the appearance of polyarthritis, oxidative stress and 
dyslipidemia.
CONCLUSION: Ginger-turmeric rhizomes mixture may be effective against RA 
severity and complications as shown in an AIA rat model.

© 2013 The Authors International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases © 2013 Asia 
Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty 
Ltd.
