BACKGROUND: Inflammatory arthritis is a chronic disease, resulting in synovitis 
and subchondral and bone area destruction, which can severely affect a patient's 
quality of life. The most common form of inflammatory arthritis is rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) in which many of the disease mechanisms are not well understood. 
The collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model is similar to RA as it exhibits 
joint space narrowing and bone erosion as well as involves inflammatory factors 
and cellular players that have been implicated in RA pathogenesis. Quantitative 
data for disease progression in RA models is difficult to obtain as serum blood 
markers may not always reflect disease state and physical disease indexes are 
subjective. Thus, it is important to develop tools to objectively assess disease 
progression in CIA.
RESULTS: Micro-CT (Computed Tomography) is a relatively mature technology that 
has been used to track a variety of anatomical changes in small animals. In this 
study, micro-CT scans of several joints of control and CIA mice were acquired at 
0, 4, 7, and 9Â weeks after the immunization with collagen type II. Each micro-CT 
scan was analyzed by applying a segmentation algorithm to individual slices in 
each image set to provide 3-dimensional representations of specific bones 
including the humerus, femur, and tibia. From these representations, the volume 
and mean density of these bones were measured and compared. This analysis showed 
that both the volume and the density of each measured bone of the CIA mice were 
significantly smaller than those of the controls at week 7.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that micro-CT can be used to quantify bone 
changes in the CIA mouse model as an alternative to disease index assessments. 
In conclusion, micro-CT could be useful as a non-invasive method to monitor the 
efficacy of new treatments for RA tested in small animals.
