Lewis (LEW) and Wistar Kyoto (WKY) rats of the same major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC) haplotype (RT.1(l)) display differential susceptibility to 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA). LEW are susceptible while WKY are resistant to 
AIA. To gain insights into the mechanistic basis of these disparate outcomes, we 
compared the gene expression profiles of the draining lymph node cells (LNC) of 
these two rat strains early (day 7) following a potentially arthritogenic 
challenge. LNC were tested both ex vivo and after restimulation with the 
disease-related antigen, mycobacterial heat-shock protein 65. Biotin-labeled 
fragment cRNA was generated from RNA of LNC and then hybridized with an 
oligonucleotide-based DNA microarray chip. The differentially expressed genes 
(DEG) were compared by limiting the false discovery rate to <5% and fold change 
â‰¥2.0, and their association with quantitative trait loci (QTL) was analyzed. 
This analysis revealed overall a more active immune response in WKY than LEW 
rats. Important differences were observed in the association of DEG with QTL in 
LEW vs. WKY rats. Both the number of upregulated DEG associated with rat 
arthritis-QTL and their level of expression were relatively higher in LEW when 
compared to WKY rat; however, the number of downregulated DEG-associated with 
rat arthritis-QTL as well as AIA-QTL were found to be higher in WKY than in LEW 
rats. In conclusion, distinct gene expression profiles define 
arthritis-susceptible versus resistant phenotype of MHC-compatible inbred rats. 
These results would advance our understanding of the pathogenesis of autoimmune 
arthritis and might also offer potential novel targets for therapeutic purposes.
