ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Tripterygium wilfordii HOOK F (TWHF) is a 
traditional Chinese medicine used in the treatment of various autoimmune 
diseases and inflammatory disorders including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and skin diseases. Triptolide (TP) is one of 
the main active ingredients of this traditional Chinese medicine. MC002 is a 
novel semi-synthetic derivate of TP which is highly water soluble, acts as a 
prodrug and is converted to TP in vivo.
AIM OF THIS STUDY: A sensitive, rapid method for the simultaneous determination 
of TP and its chemo-unstable prodrug MC002 in dog blood was developed and 
validated using electrospray ionization (ESI) liquid chromatography-tandem mass 
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Using this method, a pharmacokinetic study of MC002 and 
TP following an intravenous drip infusion of 0.2mg/kg MC002 in dogs was 
performed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Chemo-degradation of the prodrug in blood samples was 
inhibited by the addition of a small amount of sodium fluoride solution before 
using liquid-liquid extraction with ethyl acetate. The concentrations of MC002 
and TP in dog blood were determined using the LC-MS/MS method.
RESULTS: The quantitative method showed good precision and stability and is 
suitable for the assay of biological samples. The pharmacokinetic study showed 
that the elimination of MC002 was faster than that of TP, and the concentrations 
and AUC0-t values of TP were higher than MC002. MC002 can rapidly convert to TP 
in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This validated method was successfully applied in a pharmacokinetic 
study of MC002 following an intravenous drip infusion in dogs. With the 
development of this new prodrug of TP as a promising anti-cancer drug, this 
method is suitable for its further analysis in clinical studies.
