Cytopenias occur frequently in systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid 
arthritis, Felty's syndrome, and large granular lymphocyte (LGL) leukemia, but 
the bone marrow microenvironment has not been systematically studied. In LGL 
leukemia (n = 24), retrospective analysis of bone marrow (BM) histopathology 
revealed severe fibrosis in 15 of 24 patients (63%) in association with the 
presence of cytopenias, occurrence of autoimmune diseases, and splenomegaly, but 
was undetectable in control cases with B cell malignancies (n = 11). Fibrosis 
severity correlated with T cell LGL cell numbers in the BM, but not in the 
periphery, suggesting deregulation is limited to the BM microenvironment. To 
identify fibrosis-initiating populations, primary mesenchymal stromal cultures 
(MSCs) from patients were characterized and found to display proliferation 
kinetics and overabundant collagen deposition, but displayed normal telomere 
lengths and osteoblastogenic, chondrogenic, and adipogenic differentiation 
potentials. To determine the effect of fibrosis on healthy hematopoietic 
progenitor cells (HPCs), bioartificial matrixes from rat tail or purified human 
collagen were found to suppress HPC differentiation and proliferation. The 
ability of patient MSCs to support healthy HSC proliferation was significantly 
impaired, but could be rescued with collagenase pretreatment. Clustering 
analysis confirmed the undifferentiated state of patient MSCs, and pathway 
analysis revealed an inverse relationship between cell division and profibrotic 
ontologies associated with reduced basic fibroblast growth factor production, 
which was confirmed by ELISA. Reconstitution with exogenous basic fibroblast 
growth factor normalized patient MSC proliferation, collagen deposition, and HPC 
supportive function, suggesting LGL BM infiltration and secondary accumulation 
of MSC-derived collagen is responsible for hematopoietic failure in 
autoimmune-associated cytopenias in LGL leukemia.
