OBJECTIVE: The histamine H4 receptor (H4R) has been shown to drive inflammatory 
responses in models of asthma, colitis and dermatitis, and in these models it 
appears to affect both innate and adaptive immune responses. In this study, we 
used both H4R-deficient mice and a specific H4R antagonist, JNJ 28307474, to 
investigate the involvement of the H4R in mouse arthritis models.
METHODS: H4R-deficient mice and wild-type mice administered the H4R antagonist 
were studied in models of collagen antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA) and 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). The impact on Th17 cells was assessed by 
restimulation of inguinal lymphocytes in the disease or immunisation models and 
with in vitro stimulation of whole blood.
RESULTS: Both H4R-deficient mice and mice treated with the H4R antagonist 
exhibited reduced arthritis disease severity in both CAIA and CIA models. This 
was evident from the reduction in disease score and in joint histology. In the 
CIA model, treatment with the H4R antagonist reduced the number of interleukin 
(IL)-17 positive cells in the lymph node and the total production of IL-17. Th17 
cell development in vivo was reduced in H4R-deficient mice or in mice treated 
with an H4R antagonist. Finally, treatment of both mouse and human blood with an 
H4R antagonist reduced the production of IL-17 when cells were stimulated in 
vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: These results implicate the H4R in disease progression in arthritis 
and in the production of IL-17 from Th17 cells. This work supports future 
clinical exploration of H4R antagonists for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis.
