Cleome gynandra L. (Capparidaceae) is one of the vegetables commonly known as 
'Hurhur' and 'Karaila' in India, 'Pe Hua Tsai' in China and "Cat's whiskers" in 
English. Present study was aimed to characterize previously isolated Cat's 
whiskers flavonoid as 5-hydroxy-3, 7, 4' -trimethoxyflavone (5HTMF) and to 
evaluate its effect on carrageenan-induced acute inflammation in rats and 
hydrogen peroxide induced DNA damage in mouse macrophages. The ex vivo effect of 
5HTMF upon generation of free radicals in the mononuclear lymphocytes of 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) was also evaluated. 5HTMF not only 
reduce the swelling of hind paw in rats from 1 to 3Â h of carrageenan injection 
but also decreased serum nitric oxide (NO) production. Toxic hydrogen peroxide 
induced oxidative DNA damage that was significantly decreased by 5HTMF. Though 
oxidative stress is a potential biomarker for determining disease activity in 
patients with RA, surprisingly 5HTMF inhibited the superoxide, hydroxyl and NO 
radicals in the isolated peripheral blood mononuclear lymphocytes of patients 
with RA. From the above study, it may be concluded 5HTMF attenuated acute 
inflammation by inhibiting NO and by protecting the oxidative DNA damage due to 
hydrogen peroxide scavenging property. It was also equally effective in 
scavenging the free radicals in lymphocytes of patients with RA. Collectively, 
our results indicate that 5HTMF as well as leafy vegetable of Cat's whiskers may 
be a promising nontoxic food alternative in attenuating the oxidative stress, 
meriting further studies on other human inflammatory cells.
