OBJECTIVE: Tolerogenic dendritic cells (tDCs) are immunosuppressive cells with 
potent tolerogenic ability and are promising immunotherapeutic tools for 
treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, it is currently unknown whether 
allogeneic tDCs (allo-tDCs) induce tolerance in RA, and whether the numbers of 
adoptively transferred allo-tDCs, or the requirement for pulsing with relevant 
auto-antigens are important.
METHODS: tDCs were derived from bone marrow precursors of C57BL/B6 mice, which 
were induced in vitro by GM-CSF, IL-10 and TGF-β1. Collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) was modeled in D1 mice by immunization with type II collagen (CII) to test 
the therapeutic ability of allo-tDCs against CIA. Clinical and histopathologic 
scores, arthritic incidence, cytokine and anti-CII antibody secretion, and 
CD4(+)Th subsets were analyzed.
RESULTS: tDCs were characterized in vitro by a stable immature phonotype and a 
potent immunosuppressive ability. Following adoptive transfer of low doses 
(5×10(5)) of CII-loaded allo-tDCs, a remarkable anti-arthritic activity, 
improved clinical scores and histological end-points were found. Serological 
levels of inflammatory cytokines and anti-CII antibodies were also significantly 
lower in CIA mice treated with CII-pulsed allo-tDCs as compared with allo-tDCs. 
Moreover, treatment with allo-tDCs altered the proportion of Treg/Th17 cells.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggested that allo-tDCs, especially following 
antigen loading, reduced the severity of CIA in a dose-dependent manner. The 
dampening of CIA was associated with modulated cytokine secretion, Treg/Th17 
polarization and inhibition of anti-CII secretion. This study highlights the 
potential therapeutic utility of allo-tDCs in autoimmune arthritis and should 
facilitate the future design of allo-tDC immunotherapeutic strategies against 
RA.
