Phosphoinositide 3-kinases γ and δ (PI3Kγ and PI3Kδ) are expressed in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) synovium and regulate innate and adaptive immune responses. We 
determined the effect of a potent PI3Kδ,γ inhibitor, IPI-145, in two preclinical 
models of RA. IPI-145 was administered orally in rat adjuvant-induced arthritis 
(AA) and intraperitoneally in mouse collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). Efficacy 
was assessed by paw swelling, clinical scores, histopathology and radiography, 
and microcomputed tomography scanning. Gene expression and Akt phosphorylation 
in joint tissues were determined by quantitative real-time polymerase chain 
reaction and Western blot analysis. Serum concentrations of anti-type II 
collagen (CII) IgG and IgE were measured by immunoassay. T-cell responses to CII 
were assayed using thymidine incorporation and immunoassay. IPI-145 
significantly reduced arthritis severity in both RA models using dosing regimens 
initiated before onset of clinical disease. Treatment of established arthritis 
with IPI-145 in AA, but not CIA, significantly decreased arthritis progression. 
In AA, histology scores, radiographic joint damage, and matrix metalloproteinase 
(MMP)-13 expression were reduced in IPI-145-treated rats. In CIA, joint 
histology scores and expression of MMP-3 and MMP-13 mRNA were lower in the 
IPI-145 early treatment group than in the vehicle group. The ratio of anti-CII 
IgG2a to total IgG in CIA was modestly reduced. Interleukin-17 production in 
response to CII was decreased in the IPI-145-treated group, suggesting an 
inhibitory effect on T-helper cell 17 differentiation. These data show that 
PI3Kδ,γ inhibition suppresses inflammatory arthritis, as well as bone and 
cartilage damage, through effects on innate and adaptive immunity and that 
IPI-145 is a potential therapy for RA.
