Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease, primarily manifesting as 
inflammatory arthritis. It is associated with chronic inflammation of the 
synovial joints, mostly in the hands and feet, as well as with systemic 
extra-articular inflammation. The chimeric anti-interleukin (IL)-17 full-length 
monoclonal antibody (CMa17Aab) targets IL-17A, which is an important cytokine in 
the pathogenesis of RA and other inflammatory disorders. In this study, we 
investigated whether CMa17Aab exerts therapeutic effects in a mouse model of 
type II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). Mice with CIA were subcutaneously 
injected with the humanized CMa17Aab antibody. The effects of treatment were 
assessed by estimating the arthritis severity score, the extent of histological 
damage and bone destruction, the autoreactive humoral and cellular immune 
responses and the production of cytokines. Treatment with CMa17Aab exerted 
beneficial effects in the mice with CIA as regards clinical and histological 
parameters. Compared with the controls, treatment with CMa17Aab resulted in a 
significant alleviation of the severity of the symptoms of arthritis, by 
preventing bone damage and cartilage destruction, reducing humoral and cellular 
immune responses, and downregulating the expression of IL-6, IL-8, matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP)-3, IL-17, IL-1β, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, receptor 
activator for nuclear factor-κB ligand (RANKL) and interferon (IFN)-γ in 
inflamed tissues. In conclusion, our study demonstrates that treatment with 
CMa17Aab exerts beneficial effects in mice with CIA, by preventing joint 
inflammation, cartilage destruction and bone damage. These preliminary results 
suggest that CMa17Aab is an important regulator in RA, and that it may represent 
a novel therapeutic agent that may prove useful in the treatment of this 
disease.
