BACKGROUND: Norisoboldine (NOR) is a benzylisoquinoline alkaloid isolated from 
Radix Linderae, a traditional Chinese medicine. Our previous studies have 
demonstrated that it produces anti-inflammatory and anti-rheumatoid arthritis 
effects.
METHODS: The present study was undertaken to explore the analgesic effects of 
NOR and its potential mechanism in the formalin test and the acetic acid 
writhing test.
RESULTS: Oral administration of NOR dose dependently attenuated the 
formalin-induced pain responses in the second phase, and reduced 
formalin-induced paw oedema. It also diminished acetic acid-induced writhing 
responses but had no effect on acute thermal pain in the hotplate test. The 
mechanistic studies suggested that the adenosine system, but not the opioid 
receptor system, is involved in NOR-induced antinociception. Naloxone, a 
non-selective opioid receptor antagonist, had no effect on NOR-induced analgesic 
action. However, caffeine (a non-selective adenosine receptor antagonist) 
completely reversed the analgesic effect of NOR in formalin-induced nociceptive 
responses in the second phase, and 8-cyclopentyl-1, 3-dipropylxanthine (DPCPX, a 
selective adenosine A1 receptor antagonist) completely inhibited NOR-induced 
analgesia in both formalin-induced nociceptive responses and acetic acid-induced 
writhing responses. In addition, NOR reduced formalin-induced activation of 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase and calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein 
kinase II in the spinal cord, which is also blocked by DPCPX. Furthermore, NOR 
decreased forskolin-evoked cyclic adenosine monophosphate levels in mouse spinal 
cord neuronal cultures through the adenosine A1 receptor.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that NOR produces the analgesic effect in 
inflammatory pain by a mechanism related to the adenosine system.
