OBJECTIVE: Inducible costimulator (ICOS)-ICOSL interactions are necessary for 
activation of Teff cells and follicular helper T (Tfh) cells. ICOSL is expressed 
on B cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells and can be induced on 
nonhematopoietic cells. The aim of this study was to determine whether 
expression of ICOSL on B cells is necessary for the development of proteoglycan 
(PG)-induced arthritis (PGIA).
METHODS: PGIA was initiated by immunizing wild-type and ICOSL-deficient 
(ICOSL(-/-) ) or B cell-specific ICOSL(-/-) chimeric BALB/c mice with human PG 
in adjuvant. The onset and severity of arthritis were monitored over time. CD4+ 
T cell proliferation and CD4+ T cell cytokine production were measured in vitro 
after the cells were restimulated with PG. Germinal center (GC) B cells, plasma 
cells, Tfh cells, and Treg cells were identified by staining with specific 
antibodies.
RESULTS: Arthritis progression was completely inhibited in both ICOSL(-/-) mice 
and B cell-specific ICOSL(-/-) chimeric mice. Production of the Teff 
cell-produced cytokines interferon-Î³ and interleukin-17 (IL-17) and the 
antiinflammatory cytokine IL-4 was suppressed. The reduced percentages of GCs 
and Tfh cells and the decreased production of IL-21 correlated with a decrease 
in the anti-mouse PG antibody response. However, the percentage of plasma cells 
was not reduced despite a reduction in IgG responses.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that the signals provided by ICOSL-expressing B 
cells to Teff cells and Tfh cells are necessary for the development of 
arthritis. Thus, therapeutic blockade of ICOSL-ICOS interactions may be an 
effective strategy for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
