It is generally believed that some inflammatory antigens can recognize Toll-like 
receptors on synovial fibroblasts (SFs) and then activate downstream signals, 
leading to the formation of RASFs and inducing rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The 
objective of the current work was to study on the hypothesis that outer PAMP 
(LPS) binds to the inner DAMP (HMGB1) and becomes a complex that recognizes 
TLRs/RAGE on SFs, thus initiating a signaling cascade that leads to the 
secretion of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, production of 
tissue-destructive enzymes, and formation of RASFs, finally resulting in RA. 
Osteoarthritis synovial fibroblasts (OASFs) were co-cultured with HMGB1-LPS 
complex in vitro for five generations to induce the transformation of human SFs 
to RA-like SFs (tOASFs). Then, changes of tOASFs in cell cycle and 
apoptosis-autophagy balance were investigated in vitro, and the pathogenicity of 
tOASFs was evaluated in a SCID mouse model in vivo. In vitro cell cycle analysis 
showed more tOASFs passing through the G1/S checkpoint and moving to S or G2 
phase. Flow cytometry and confocal microscopy showed that apoptosis was reduced 
and autophagy was enhanced significantly in tOASFs as compared with those in 
OASFs. The expression of certain receptors and adhesion molecules in tOASFs was 
upregulated. In vivo experiments showed that tOASFs attached to, invaded, and 
degraded the co-implanted cartilage. In addition, histochemistry showed 
excessive proliferation of tOASFs and the expression of matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs). Based on the above findings, we conclude that 
HMGB1-LPS complex could promote the formation of RASFs.
