Mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) loaded bio-scaffold transplantation is a promising 
therapeutic approach for bone regeneration and repair. However, growing evidence 
shows that pro-inflammatory mediators from injured tissues suppress osteogenic 
differentiation and impair bone formation. To improve MSC-based bone 
regeneration, it is important to understand the mechanism of inflammation 
mediated osteogenic suppression. In the present study, we found that synovial 
fluid from rheumatoid arthritis patients and pro-inflammatory cytokines 
including interleukin-1α, interleukin-1β, and tumor necrosis factor α, 
stimulated intercellular adhesion molecule-1(ICAM-1) expression and impaired 
osteogenic differentiation of MSCs. Interestingly, overexpression of ICAM-1 in 
MSCs using a genetic approach also inhibited osteogenesis. In contrast, ICAM-1 
knockdown significantly reversed the osteogenic suppression. In addition, after 
transplanting a traceable MSC-poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) construct in rat 
calvarial defects, we found that ICAM-1 suppressed MSC osteogenic 
differentiation and matrix mineralization in vivo. Mechanistically, we found 
that ICAM-1 enhances MSC proliferation but causes stem cell marker loss. 
Furthermore, overexpression of ICAM-1 stably activated the MAPK and NF-κB 
pathways but suppressed the PI3K/AKT pathway in MSCs. More importantly, specific 
inhibition of the ERK/MAPK and NF-κB pathways or activation of the PI3K/AKT 
pathway partially rescued osteogenic differentiation, while inhibition of the 
p38/MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathway caused more serious osteogenic suppression. In 
summary, our findings reveal a novel function of ICAM-1 in osteogenesis and 
suggest a new molecular target to improve bone regeneration and repair in 
inflammatory microenvironments.
