Cebranopadol 
(trans-6'-fluoro-4',9'-dihydro-N,N-dimethyl-4-phenyl-spiro[cyclohexane-1,1'(3'H)-pyrano[3,4-b]indol]-4-amine) 
is a novel analgesic nociceptin/orphanin FQ peptide (NOP) and opioid receptor 
agonist [Ki (nM)/EC50 (nM)/relative efficacy (%): human NOP receptor 
0.9/13.0/89; human mu-opioid peptide (MOP) receptor 0.7/1.2/104; human 
kappa-opioid peptide receptor 2.6/17/67; human delta-opioid peptide receptor 
18/110/105]. Cebranopadol exhibits highly potent and efficacious antinociceptive 
and antihypersensitive effects in several rat models of acute and chronic pain 
(tail-flick, rheumatoid arthritis, bone cancer, spinal nerve ligation, diabetic 
neuropathy) with ED50 values of 0.5-5.6 µg/kg after intravenous and 25.1 µg/kg 
after oral administration. In comparison with selective MOP receptor agonists, 
cebranopadol was more potent in models of chronic neuropathic than acute 
nociceptive pain. Cebranopadol's duration of action is long (up to 7 hours after 
intravenous 12 µg/kg; >9 hours after oral 55 µg/kg in the rat tail-flick test). 
The antihypersensitive activity of cebranopadol in the spinal nerve ligation 
model was partially reversed by pretreatment with the selective NOP receptor 
antagonist 
J-113397[1-[(3R,4R)-1-cyclooctylmethyl-3-hydroxymethyl-4-piperidyl]-3-ethyl-1,3-dihydro-2H-benzimidazol-2-one] 
or the opioid receptor antagonist naloxone, indicating that both NOP and opioid 
receptor agonism are involved in this activity. Development of analgesic 
tolerance in the chronic constriction injury model was clearly delayed compared 
with that from an equianalgesic dose of morphine (complete tolerance on day 26 
versus day 11, respectively). Unlike morphine, cebranopadol did not disrupt 
motor coordination and respiration at doses within and exceeding the analgesic 
dose range. Cebranopadol, by its combination of agonism at NOP and opioid 
receptors, affords highly potent and efficacious analgesia in various pain 
models with a favorable side effect profile.
