Cardiovascular events are important co-morbidities in patients with chronic 
inflammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis. Tristetraprolin (TTP) regulates 
pro-inflammatory processes through mRNA destabilization and therefore 
TTP-deficient mice (TTP(-/-) mice) develop a chronic inflammation resembling 
human rheumatoid arthritis. We used this mouse model to evaluate molecular 
signaling pathways contributing to the enhanced atherosclerotic risk in chronic 
inflammatory diseases. In the aorta of TTP(-/-) mice we observed elevated mRNA 
expression of known TTP targets like tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and 
macrophage inflammatory protein-1α, as well as of other pro-atherosclerotic 
mediators, like Calgranulin A, Cathepsin S, and Osteopontin. Independent of 
cholesterol levels TTP(-/-) mice showed a significant reduction of 
acetylcholine-induced, nitric oxide-mediated vasorelaxation. The endothelial 
dysfunction in TTP(-/-) mice was associated with increased levels of reactive 
oxygen and nitrogen species (RONS), indicating an enhanced nitric oxide 
inactivation by RONS in the TTP(-/-) animals. The altered RONS generation 
correlates with increased expression of NADPH oxidase 2 (Nox2) resulting from 
enhanced Nox2 mRNA stability. Although TNF-α is believed to be a central 
mediator of inflammation-driven atherosclerosis, genetic inactivation of TNF-α 
neither improved endothelial function nor normalized Nox2 expression or RONS 
production in TTP(-/-) animals. Systemic inflammation caused by TTP deficiency 
leads to endothelial dysfunction. This process is independent of cholesterol and 
not mediated by TNF-α solely. Thus, other mediators, which need to be 
identified, contribute to enhanced cardiovascular risk in chronic inflammatory 
diseases.
