OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory autoimmune disease 
characterized by severe joint erosion and systemic osteoporosis. Chronic T cell 
activation is a hallmark of RA, and agents that target the CD28 receptor on T 
cells, which is required for T cell activation, are being increasingly used as 
therapies for RA and other inflammatory diseases. Lymphocytes play complex roles 
in the regulation of the skeleton, and although activated T cells and B cells 
secrete cytokines that promote skeletal decline, under physiologic conditions 
lymphocytes also have key protective roles in the stabilization of skeletal 
mass. Consequently, disruption of T cell costimulation may have unforeseen 
consequences for physiologic bone turnover. This study was undertaken to 
investigate the impact of pharmacologic CD28 T cell costimulation blockade on 
physiologic bone turnover and structure.
METHODS: C57BL6 mice were treated with CTLA-4Ig, a pharmacologic CD28 antagonist 
or with irrelevant control antibody (Ig), and serum biochemical markers of bone 
turnover were quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Bone mineral 
density and indices of bone structure were further measured by dual x-ray 
absorptiometry and micro-computed tomography, respectively, and static and 
dynamic indices of bone formation were quantified using bone histomorphometry.
RESULTS: Pharmacologic disruption of CD28 T cell costimulation in mice 
significantly increased bone mass and enhanced indices of bone structure, a 
consequence of enhanced bone formation, concurrent with enhanced secretion of 
the bone anabolic factor Wnt-10b by T cells.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of CD28 costimulation by CTLA-4Ig promotes T cell Wnt-10b 
production and bone formation and may represent a novel anabolic strategy for 
increasing bone mass in osteoporotic conditions.
