Tripterygium wilfordii Hook. f. (TW) is a traditional herbal medicine which has 
been widely used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune 
diseases. However, adverse reactions of TW such as hepatotoxicity and 
nephrotoxicity have been frequently reported in clinic. With the aim to evaluate 
the potency and toxicity of TW, we collected eleven batches of TW from different 
localities across Chinese mainland, and investigated the inhibition of their 
methanol extracts on the proliferation of mouse spleen lymphocytes, normal human 
hepatocyte (L-02) cells and African green monkey kidney (COS-7) cells. TW 
extracts with three different concentrations were designed as the experimental 
groups. Our present findings provided consistent evidence that TW had 
significant concentration-dependent inhibitory action on lymphocytes, L-02 and 
COS-7 cells. At the concentrations of 0.75 and 1.5 mg/mL, most TW groups showed 
statistically significant inhibition of lymphocyte proliferation when compared 
with the control group (p < 0.01), and the inhibition of TW extract on 
lymphocytes was almost equal to 1.0 mg/mL aspirin (p > 0.05). In most test 
groups, significant toxicities were shown on L-02 cells at 0.6 and 3.0 mg/mL 
(p < 0.01), and on COS-7 cells at 3.0 mg/mL (p < 0.01). At 3.0 mg/mL, almost all 
TW groups exerted obvious toxicities toward L-02 and COS-7 cells which were 
equal to or even higher than 1.0 mg/mL aspirin. In view of these results, 
further studies are needed to elucidate the relations among the effective 
component, curative effect and toxicity of TW to ensure its effectiveness and 
safety for human consumption.
