Serum amyloid A (SAA) is an apolipoprotein involved in poorly understood roles 
in inflammation. Upon trauma, hepatic expression of SAA rises 1000 times the 
basal levels. In the case of inflammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis, 
there is a risk for deposition of SAA fibrils in various organs leading to 
Amyloid A (AA) amyloidosis. Although the amyloid deposits in AA amyloidosis 
accumulate with the glycosaminoglycan (GAG) heparan sulfate, the role GAGs play 
in the function and pathology of SAA is an enigma. It has been shown that GAG 
sulfation is a contributing factor in protein fibrillation and for 
co-aggregating with a plethora of amyloidogenic proteins. Herein, the effects of 
heparin, heparan sulfate, hyaluronic acid, chondroitin sulfate A, and heparosan 
on the oligomerization and aggregation properties of pathogenic mouse SAA1.1 
were investigated. Delipidated SAA was used to better understand the 
interactions between SAA and GAGs without the complicating involvement of 
lipids. The results revealed-to varying degrees-that all GAGs accelerated SAA1.1 
aggregation, but had variable effects on its fibrillation. Heparan sulfate, 
hyaluronic acid, and heparosan did not affect much the fibrillation of SAA1.1. 
In contrast, chondroitin sulfate A blocked SAA fibril formation and facilitated 
the formation of spherical aggregates of various sizes. Interestingly, heparin 
caused formation of spherical SAA1.1 aggregates of various sizes, vast amounts 
of thin protofibrils, and few long fibrils of various heights. These results 
suggest that GAGs may have an intrinsic and divergent influence on the 
aggregation and fibrillation of HDL-free SAA1.1 inÂ vivo, with functional and 
pathological implications.
