BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease that 
affects about 1% of the adult population and occurs twice as frequently among 
women than men. At present it is accepted that pathogenesis of RA is based on 
inflammatory response mediated by CD4(+) Th1 and Th17 lymphocytes. The most 
commonly applied model imitating RA is the collagen induced arthritis (CIA). A 
growing evidence shows that there is a correlation between microbial dysbiosis 
and human pathology which includes autoimmunity, allergic diseases, obesity, 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), metabolic syndrome.
METHODS: Collagen induced arthritis was used to study influence of natural gut 
flora on course of rheumatoid arthritis.
RESULTS: Current work employing CIA model showed that partial depletion of 
natural gut flora with orally administered antibiotic Baytril (enrofloxacin) 
aggravates disease severity when compared to control mice. Observed partial 
depletion of both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria did not affect animal body 
weight. Additionally, in vitro study showed increased production of IFN-? and 
IL-17A and decreased release of IL-4 by axillary lymph node cells (ALNC) 
isolated from mice treated with antibiotic and induced CIA when compared to 
positive control. Furthermore, treatment with antibiotic prior to CIA induction 
results in augmented production of IFN-?, IL-17A and IL-6 by mesenteric lymph 
node cells (MLNC).
CONCLUSION: Presented data suggest that alteration of gut microbiota via use of 
enrofloxacin may play a role in modulating arthritis symptom severity in this 
mouse model.

Copyright Â© 2014 Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences. 
Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.
