Genetic linkage analyses, genome-wide association studies of single nucleotide 
polymorphisms, copy number variation surveys, and mutation screenings found the 
human chromosomal 12q24 locus, with the genes SH2B3 and ATXN2 in its core, to be 
associated with an exceptionally wide spectrum of disease susceptibilities. 
Hematopoietic traits of red and white blood cells (like erythrocytosis and 
myeloproliferative disease), autoimmune disorders (like type 1 diabetes, coeliac 
disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, thrombotic 
antiphospholipid syndrome, lupus erythematosus, multiple sclerosis, 
hypothyroidism and vitiligo), also vascular pathology (like kidney glomerular 
filtration rate deficits, serum urate levels, plasma beta-2-microglobulin 
levels, retinal microcirculation problems, diastolic and systolic blood pressure 
and hypertension, cardiovascular infarction), furthermore obesity, 
neurodegenerative conditions (like the polyglutamine-expansion disorder 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 2, Parkinson's disease, the motor-neuron disease 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and progressive supranuclear palsy), and finally 
longevity were reported. Now it is important to clarify, in which ways the loss 
or gain of function of the locally encoded proteins SH2B3/LNK and ataxin-2, 
respectively, contribute to these polygenic health problems. SH2B3/LNK is known 
to repress the JAK2/ABL1 dependent proliferation of white blood cells. Its null 
mutations in human and mouse are triggers of autoimmune traits and leukemia 
(acute lymphoblastic leukemia or chronic myeloid leukemia-like), while missense 
mutations were found in erythrocytosis-1 patients. Ataxin-2 is known to act on 
RNA-processing and trophic receptor internalization. While its 
polyglutamine-expansion mediated gain-of-function causes neuronal atrophy in 
human and mouse, its deletion leads to obesity and insulin resistance in mice. 
Thus, it is conceivable that the polygenic pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes is 
enhanced by an SH2B3-dysregulation-mediated predisposition to autoimmune 
diseases that conspires with an ATXN2-deficiency-mediated predisposition to 
lipid and glucose metabolism pathology.
