OBJECTIVE: Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) signals via 2 receptors, TNFR type I 
(TNFRI) and TNFRII, with distinct cellular distribution and signaling functions. 
In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the net effect of TNFR signaling favors 
inflammatory responses while inhibiting the activity of regulatory T cells. 
TNFRII signaling has been shown to promote Treg cell function. To assess the 
relative contributions of TNFRI and TNFRII signaling to inflammatory and 
regulatory responses in vivo, we compared the effect of TNF blockade, hence 
TNFRI/II, versus TNFRI alone in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) as a model of 
RA.
METHODS: Mice with established arthritis were treated for 10 days with 
anti-mouse TNFRI domain antibody (dAb; DMS5540), an isotype control dAb 
(DMS5538), or murine TNFRII genetically fused with mouse IgG1 Fc domain 
(mTNFRII-Fc) beginning on the day of arthritis onset, and disease progression 
was monitored. Systemic cytokine concentrations and numbers of T cell subsets in 
lymph nodes and spleens were measured, and intrinsic Treg cell function was 
determined by ex vivo suppression assays.
RESULTS: Progression of CIA was suppressed similarly by TNFRI (DMS5540) and 
TNFRI/II (mTNFRII-Fc) blockade. However, blockade of TNFRI/II led to increased 
effector T cell activity, which was not observed after selective TNFRI blockade, 
suggesting an immunoregulatory role of TNFRII. In support of this, TNFRI 
blockade, but not TNFRI/II blockade, expanded and activated Treg cells. 
Furthermore, a dramatic increase in expression of the Treg cell signature genes 
FoxP3 and TNFRII was observed in joints undergoing remission, which supports the 
notion that these molecules have a physiologic role in the resolution of 
inflammation.
CONCLUSION: We propose that a therapeutic strategy that targets TNFRI while 
sparing TNFRII has the potential to both inhibit inflammation and promote Treg 
cell activity, which might be superior to TNF blockade.
