OBJECTIVE: To study the expression level of peptidylarginine deiminase 4 (PADI4) 
and protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 22 (PTPN22) in the synovium of 
rat model of collagen-induced arthritis, and to explore their possible 
therapeutic role in rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Thirty-two female Wistar rats weighing 100±20 g were randomly assigned 
into 3-week collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model group (n=8), 4-week CIA model 
group (n=8), 6-week CIA model group (n=8), and the control group (n=8). The body 
weight changes of each group were recorded. The expression levels of PADI4 and 
PTPN22 were detected and compared by the methods of immunohistochemical staining 
and Western blot.
RESULTS: Arthritis of rat began to form 14 days after sensitization and the 
joint swelling reached peak at 28 days. The weights of the rats slowly grew both 
in CIA model groups and the control group. Immunohistochemical staining results 
showed that the positive expression of PADI4 and PTPN22 was mainly located in 
cartilage peripheral mononuclear cells, the cytoplasm of infiltrated cells, and 
bone marrow cavity. There were significant differences in the optical density of 
PADI4 and PTPN22 among CIA model groups and the control group (PADI4, 
0.2898±0.012, 0.2982±0.022, 0.2974±0.031, 0.2530±0.013 in 3-week CIA model, 
4-week CIA model, 6-week CIA model and control groups; PTPN22, 0.2723±0.004, 
0.2781±0.010, 0.2767±0.008, 0.2422±0.019; all P <0.05). The expression bands of 
PADI4 were observed in Western blot 3 weeks after initial immunization, the 
thickest in the 4th week, and decreased in the 6th week. The expression bands of 
PTPN2 were observed at all the time points, with no obvious time-dependent 
trend.
CONCLUSIONS: PADI4 and PTPN22 are obviously correlated with CIA in rat model. 
PADI4 is expressed at early stage of the disease, while the expression of PTPN22 
sustains throughout the course.
