It has been reported that reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a role as 
intracellular signaling molecules in RANKL stimulation. Previously we 
demonstrated that induction of cytoprotective enzyme expression by Nrf2-gene 
transfer successfully ameliorated RANKL-dependent osteoclastogenesis. In the 
present study, we hypothesized that Nrf2 activation by inhibiting ubiquitination 
and degradation of Nrf2 by ETGE-peptide would induce Nrf2-dependent 
cytoprotective enzyme expression, attenuate ROS signaling, and thereby inhibit 
RANKL-dependent osteoclastogenesis. ETGE-peptide containing a cell-permeable 
sequence (seven consecutive arginine; 7R-ETGE) was applied to a mouse macrophage 
cell-line RAW 264.7 cell or a primary macrophage culture. ETGE-peptide prevents 
Keap1 from binding to Nrf2. Nrf2 nuclear translocation and Nrf2-dependent 
cytoprotective enzyme induction was observed. The effects of 7R-ETGE on 
RANKL-dependent induction of intracellular ROS levels and osteoclastogenesis 
were examined. Finally, the protective effect of 7R-ETGE on RANKL-mediated bone 
destruction was investigated in mice. 7R-ETGE dose-dependently induced nuclear 
Nrf2, followed by the induction of cytoprotective enzyme expression at both the 
gene and protein level. 7R-ETGE inhibited upregulation of intracellular ROS 
levels by RANKL stimulation, and osteoclastogenesis was attenuated. Of 
particular interest was that local injection of 7R-ETGE ameliorated 
RANKL-mediated bone destruction. Local induction of nuclear Nrf2 by protein 
transduction is a potential novel therapeutic target for bone destruction 
diseases such as periodontitis and rheumatoid arthritis.
