It has been recently shown that Toll-like receptor4 mediated nuclear factor κB 
(TLR4-NF-κB) signaling plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid 
arthritis mediated by pro-inflammatory cytokines in arthritic synovium. Here we 
evaluate the therapeutic potential of glycol-split non-anticoagulant 
heparin/d-erythro-sphingosine nanoparticles (NAHNPs), which have shown strong 
inhibitory effect against TLR4 induced inflammation, in an experimental 
arthritis model. NAHNP significantly inhibited the production of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β in lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS)-induced primary mouse macrophages and DC2.4 dendritic cell line. The 
nanoparticles were administered to type II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mice 
by intraarticular injections once per day starting from onset of the disease 
symptoms. Treatment with NAHNP had a potent suppressive effect in CIA mice, 
observed with a decrease in arthritis score and footpad swelling. The animals 
treated with NAHNP significantly reduced levels of IgG1 and IgG2a antibodies 
against bovine type II collagen. Levels of proinflammatory cytokines--e.g., 
TNF-α, IL-6 and IL-1β in knee joints and sera were significantly inhibited 
compared to control mice. Moreover, nuclear localization of RelA in knee joints 
was significantly inhibited in NAHNP treatment, indicating down-regulation of 
the NF-κB signaling pathway. In addition, histological examination revealed 
significant suppression of inflammatory cell infiltration, joint destruction and 
synovial proliferation in synovium compared with control mice. These results 
suggest that selective inhibition of TLR4-NF-κB signaling with lipid modified 
heparin derivatives composited to nanostructures provides an effective 
therapeutic approach to inhibit chronic inflammation in an animal model of 
rheumatoid arthritis.
