OBJECTIVES: IL-1beta is a potent proinflammatory, pro-fibrogenetic and 
pro-athrosclerosis cytokine which has been shown to play an important role in an 
expanding number of noninfectious, chronic inflammatory conditions including 
cardiovascular disease, renal fibrosis, rheumatoid arthritis and even type 2 
diabetes. Losartan is an angiotensin II receptor antagonist widely used for the 
treatment of hypertension, diabetic nephropathy and congestive heart failure. In 
this study, we attempted to clarify whether losartan has an inhibitory effect on 
IL-1beta. To further elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying the 
anti-IL-1beta property of losartan, we studied the LPS+ATP-induced activation of 
NALP3 inflammasome which controls the muturation and secretion of IL-1beta.
METHODS: LPS and ATP were used to stimulate the release of IL-1beta from 
thioglycollate-elicited macrophages from BALB/c mice. The production of IL-1beta 
was evaluated by ELISA assay and NALP3, caspase-1, IL-beta mRNA levels were 
determined by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In cultured thioglycollate-elicited macrophages, we observed that LPS + 
ATP greatly enhanced IL-1 beta secretion (6938.00 +/- 83.45; P < 0.05) and the 
mRNA levels of NALP3, caspase-1 which are two main components of NALP3 
inflammasome (60.88 +/- 8.28; 1.31 +/- 0.04, P < 0.05 for both). The macrophages 
co-cultured with losartan showed low production of IL-1beta (3907.50 +/- 143.61; 
P < 0.05) and low production of NALP3, caspase-1mRNA (29.82 +/- 6.92; 1.12 +/- 
0.05, P < 0.05 for both). Losartan did not reduce IL-1beta mRNA(P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that the NALP3 inflammasome is up-regulated and 
activated in the mouse macrophage in response to LPS + ATP stimulation. Losartan 
is able to suppress the LPS + ATP-induced production of IL-1beta protein. In 
addition, this effectmay be partially mediated by suppressing NALP3 inflammasome 
activation.
