Fenclozic acid (Myalex) was developed by ICI pharmaceuticals in the 1960s for 
the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and was a promising compound with a good 
preclinical safety profile and efficacy. While it did not show adverse hepatic 
effects in preclinical animal tests or initial studies in man [ Chalmers et al. 
Ann. Rheum. Dis. 1969 , 28 , 595 and Chalmers et al. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 1969 , 28 
, 590 ], it was later withdrawn from clinical development. Hepatotoxicity was 
observed in humans at daily doses of 400 mg but was not replicated in any of the 
animal species tested. Rodrigues et al. [ Arch. Toxicol. 2013 , 87 , 1569 ] 
published a mechanistic investigation using modern in vitro assays/techniques in 
order to investigate the hepatotoxicity; however, only the covalent binding in 
rat, dog, and human microsomes was identified as a potential indicator for 
hepatoxicity. Metabolites associated with or responsible for covalent binding 
could not be detected, likely due to the low in vitro metabolic turnover of 
fenclozic acid in microsomes. Foulkes [ J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 1970 , 172 , 
115 ] investigated the in vivo metabolism of fenclozic acid which included a rat 
bile duct cannulated (BDC) study characterizing the biliary and urinary 
metabolites; however, no reactive metabolites were identified. This study aimed 
to reinvestigate the in vivo metabolism of fenclozic acid in rat, with a focus 
on identifying any reactive metabolites that could explain the in vitro covalent 
binding in microsomes observed across the species. Using modern analytical 
techniques, we were successful in identifying an epoxide reactive metabolite, 
which upon conjugation with glutathione (GSH), formed up to 16 GSH-related 
products including positional and diastereoisomers. Not including the GSH 
related conjugates, 7 additional metabolites were identified compared to these 
previous metabolism studies.
