In rodent models of inflammatory arthritis, bone erosion has been non-invasively 
assessed by micro-computed tomography (micro-CT). However, non-invasive 
assessments of paw swelling (oedema) are still based on clinical grading by 
visual evaluation, or measurements by callipers, not always reliable for the 
tiny mouse paws. The aim of this work was to demonstrate a novel straightforward 
3D micro-CT analysis protocol capable of quantifying not only joint bone 
erosion, but also soft tissue swelling, from the same scans, in a rodent 
inflammatory arthritis model. Balb/c mice were divided into two groups: collagen 
antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA) and CAIA treated with prednisolone, the latter 
reflecting an established treatment in human rheumatoid arthritis. Clinical paw 
scores were recorded. On day 10, front paws were assessed by micro-CT and 
histology. Micro-CT measurements included paw volume (bone and soft tissue 
together) and bone volume at the radiocarpal joint, and bone volume from the 
radiocarpal to the metacarpophalangeal joint. Micro-CT analysis revealed 
significantly lower paw volume (-36%, P < 0.01) and higher bone volume (+17%, P 
< 0.05) in prednisolone-treated CAIA mice compared with untreated CAIA mice. Paw 
volume and bone volume assessed by micro-CT correlated significantly with 
clinical and histological scores (|r| > 0.5, P < 0.01). Untreated CAIA mice 
showed significantly higher clinical scores, higher inflammation levels 
histologically, cartilage and bone degradation, and pannus formation, compared 
with treated mice (P < 0.01). The presented novel micro-CT analysis protocol 
enables 3D-quantification of paw swelling at the micrometre level, along with 
the typically assessed bone erosion, using the same images/scans, without 
altering the scanning procedure or using contrast agents.

Â© The Authors. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of Scandanavian Society of Immunology (SSI).
