OBJECTIVES: Progressive destruction of synovial joint cartilage and bone occurs 
in pathological conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) because of the 
overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and activation of nuclear factor 
kappa B (NF-κB). Through the screening of NF-κB inhibitors by a luciferase 
reporter gene assay, we identified parthenolide (PAR) as the most potent NF-κB 
inhibitor, among several PAR analogue compounds. This study was undertaken to 
determine whether PAR inhibits pro-inflammatory cytokine production, cartilage 
degradation, and inflammatory arthritis.
METHOD: The mRNA levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines were examined by real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Proteoglycan content and release were 
determined by measuring glycosaminoglycan (GAG) levels using the 
dimethylmethylene blue (DMMB) dye-binding assay. The potential role of PAR in 
treatment of arthritis was studied using a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
model.
RESULTS: We established that PAR, as a prototype compound, suppressed 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α-induced increases 
in matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1, MMP-3, inducible nitric oxide synthase 
(iNOS), and interleukin (IL)-1β mRNA in chondrocytes. In addition, PAR prevented 
proteoglycan degradation triggered by pro-inflammatory cytokines. PAR treatment 
at the onset of CIA symptoms significantly reduced synovitis, inflammation, and 
pannus formation scores. Reduced synovial inflammation after PAR treatment was 
also reflected in significantly less bone erosion and cartilage damage.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate a protective effect of PAR on the catabolic 
insults of pro-inflammatory cytokines on chondrocyte metabolism and GAG release 
in vitro and in CIA. PAR had anti-inflammatory and structure-modifying effects 
on experimental arthritis, suggesting that PAR may be useful as a potential 
alternative or adjunct therapy for inflammatory arthritis.
