IDO2 is a relative of IDO1 implicated in tryptophan catabolism and immune 
modulation but its specific contributions to normal physiology and 
pathophysiology are not known. Evolutionary genetic studies suggest that IDO2 
has a unique function ancestral to IDO1. In mice, IDO2 gene deletion does not 
appreciably affect embryonic development or hematopoiesis, but it leads to 
defects in allergic or autoimmune responses and in the ability of IDO1 to 
influence the generation ofâ€‰T regulatory cells. Gene expression studies indicate 
that IDO2 is a basally and more narrowly expressed gene than IDO1 and that IDO2 
is uniquely regulated by AhR, which serves as a physiological receptor for the 
tryptophan catabolite kynurenine. In the established KRN transgenic mouse model 
of rheumatoid arthritis, where IDO1 gene deletion has no effect, IDO2 deletion 
selectively blunts responses to autoantigen but has no effect on responses to 
neoantigen challenge. In human populations, natural variations in IDO2 gene 
sequence that attenuate enzymatic activity have been reported to influence brain 
cancer control and adaptive immune responses to the IDO2 protein itself, 
consistent with the concept that IDO2 is involved in shaping immune tolerance in 
human beings. Biochemical and pharmacological studies provide further evidence 
of differences in IDO2 enzymology and function relative to IDO1. We suggest that 
IDO2 may act in a distinct manner from IDO1 as a set-point for tolerance to 
"altered-self" antigens along the self-non-self continuum where immune 
challenges from cancer and autoimmunity may arise.
