AIMS: The aim of this study was to evaluate the antinociceptive (acute assays) 
and anti-inflammatory (chronic assays) effects of kramecyne (KACY), a peroxide 
isolated from Krameria cytisoides.
MAIN METHODS: The antinociceptive activity of KACY was evaluated using the hot 
plate, acetic acid and formalin tests. The effects of KACY on heat-induced 
hemolysis in rat erythrocytes were also evaluated. The in vivo anti-inflammatory 
assays were performed using the chronic TPA (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 
13-acetate) method to induce ear edema and carrageenan-kaolin induced arthritis 
(CKIA). In the CKIA model, the hot plate test was performed, serum samples were 
obtained for the quantitation of pro-inflammatory (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12 and TNF-α) 
and anti-inflammatory (IL-4 and IL-10) cytokines.
KEY FINDINGS: KACY possess antinociceptive effects with comparable activity to 
naproxen (NPX). KACY inhibited hemolysis (EC50 = 180 μg/mL), in comparison to 
the untreated group and with a higher potency than NPX (EC50 = 263 μg/mL). KACY 
at 50 mg/kg decreased inflammation by 38% (chronic TPA-induced edema model) and 
by 26% (CKIA model), in comparison with the vehicle group and with similar 
activity to the positive controls 8 mg/kg indomethacin (IND) and 1 mg/kg 
methotrexate (MTX), respectively. In the CKIA model, KACY increased the release 
of anti-inflammatory (IL-4 and IL-10) cytokines but reduced the production of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12 and TNF-α). KACY at 50 and 100 
mg/kg showed antinociceptive effects by 27% and 23%, respectively, in mice with 
mono-arthritis.
SIGNIFICANCE: KACY might be a good alternative for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) due its antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities.
