BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory disease that leads to 
destruction of both articular cartilage and bone tissues. In rheumatic joints, 
synoviocytes and T-lymphocytes as well as bone cells produce the receptor 
activator of nuclear factor Îº-B (RANK) ligand (RANKL), which binds to RANK on 
the surface of osteoclasts and their precursor cells to induce differentiation 
and activation of osteoclasts. Hence, inhibition of RANKL may be a promising 
approach to suppress osteolysis in RA. On the other hand, RANKL production by 
lymphocytes indicates the possibility that its inhibition would be effective to 
suppress inflammation in RA. In addition, it has been reported that cathepsin K, 
a predominant cysteine protease in osteoclasts, is involved in cartilage 
destruction in RA model mice. Here, we evaluated the effects of an anti-RANKL 
antibody on inflammation in footpads and degradation of articular cartilage in 
RA model mice.
RESULTS: We induced arthritis in mice by injection of anti-type II collagen 
antibodies and lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Inhibition of RANKL by an anti-RANKL 
antibody (OYC1, Oriental Yeast, Tokyo, Japan) was confirmed by increased bone 
volume in the metaphysis of tibias. Swelling in either limb until day 14 was 
seen in 5 of 6 mice injected with anti-collagen antibodies and LPS without 
treatment with OYC1, while that was seen in 4 of 5 mice treated with OYC1. The 
average arthritis scores on day 14 in those groups were 2.17 and 3.00, 
respectively, indicating that OYC1 did not ameliorate inflammation in the limbs. 
Histological analyses indicated that OYC1 does not protect articular cartilage 
from destruction in mice with arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present study failed to show the effectiveness of an anti-RANKL 
antibody to ameliorate inflammation in the limbs or protect articular cartilage 
from degradation in a collagen antibody-induced arthritis mouse model.
