BACKGROUND AIMS: Rheumatoid arthritis is a systemic autoimmune disorder. In this 
study, we first compared the therapeutic effects of syngeneic and xenogeneic 
adipose tissue-derived stem cells on a collagen-induced arthritis mouse model. 
Second, we investigated the synergistic preventive effects of CTLA4Ig and 
adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (ASCs) as a therapeutic 
substance.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in all groups except for the normal, saline (N) 
group, using chicken type II collagen (CII). Animals were divided into C 
(control, saline), H (hASCs), M (mASCs) and N groups (experiment I) and C, H, CT 
(CTLA4Ig-overexpressing human ASC [CTLA4Ig-hASCs]) and N groups (experiment II), 
according to transplanted material. Approximately 2 × 10(6) ASCs or 150 μL of 
saline was intravenously administered on days 24, 27, 30 and 34, and all animals 
were killed on days 42 to 44 after CII immunization.
RESULTS: Anti-mouse CII autoantibodies were significantly lower in the H, M and 
CT groups than in the C group. Cartilage damage severity score and C-telopeptide 
of type II collagen were significantly lower in the CT group than in the C 
group. The serum levels of IL-6 were significantly lower in the H, M and CT 
groups than in the C group. The serum levels of keratinocyte chemoattractant 
were significantly lower in the CT group than the C group.
CONCLUSIONS: There were similar effects of ASCs on the decrease of anti-mouse 
CII autoantibody levels between syngeneic and xenogeneic transplantations, and 
CTLA4Ig-hASCs showed synergistic preventive effects compared with non-transduced 
hASCs.

Copyright © 2015 International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
