BACKGROUND: Arachidonic acid (ARA) is an essential fatty acid and a major 
constituent of biomembranes. It is converted into various lipid mediators, such 
as prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), which is involved in the development of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). However, the effects of dietary ARA on RA are unclear. Our 
objective was to clarify the effects of dietary ARA on an experimental rat 
arthritis model.
METHODS: Lew rats were fed three contents of ARA diet (0.07%, 0.15% or 0.32% ARA 
in diet (w/w)), a docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) diet (0.32% DHA), or a control 
diet. After 4 weeks, arthritis was induced by injection of Freund's complete 
adjuvant into the hind footpad. We observed the development of arthritis for 
another 4 weeks, and evaluated arthritis severity, fatty acid and lipid mediator 
contents in the paw, and expression of genes related to lipid mediator formation 
and inflammatory cytokines. Treatment with indomethacin was also evaluated.
RESULTS: The ARA content of phospholipids in the paw was significantly elevated 
with dietary ARA in a dose-dependent manner. Dietary ARA as well as DHA did not 
affect arthritis severity (paw edema, arthritis score, and bone erosion). PGE2 
content in the paw was increased by arthritis induction, but was not modified by 
dietary ARA. Dietary ARA did not affect the contents of other lipid mediators 
and gene expression of cyclooxygenase (COX)-1, COX-2, lipoxgenases and 
inflammatory cytokines. Indomethacin suppressed arthritis severity and PGE2 
content in the paw.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that dietary ARA increases ARA content in the 
paw, but has no effect on arthritis severity and PGE2 content of the paw in a 
rat arthritis model.
