Muscle inflammation is often associated with its expansion. Bladder smooth 
muscle inflammation-induced cell death is accompanied by hyperplasia and 
hypertrophy as the primary cause for poor bladder function. In mice, DNA damage 
initiated by chemotherapeutic drug cyclophosphamide activated caspase 1 through 
the formation of the NLRP3 complex resulting in detrusor hyperplasia. A 
cyclophosphamide metabolite, acrolein, caused global DNA methylation and 
accumulation of DNA damage in a mouse model of bladder inflammation and in 
cultured bladder muscle cells. In correlation, global DNA methylation and NLRP3 
expression was up-regulated in human chronic bladder inflammatory tissues. The 
epigenetic silencing of DNA damage repair gene, Ogg1, could be reversed by the 
use of demethylating agents. In mice, demethylating agents reversed 
cyclophosphamide-induced bladder inflammation and detrusor expansion. The 
transgenic knock-out of Ogg1 in as few as 10% of the detrusor cells tripled the 
proliferation of the remaining wild type counterparts in an in vitro co-culture 
titration experiment. Antagonizing IL-1β with Anakinra, a rheumatoid arthritis 
therapeutic, prevented detrusor proliferation in conditioned media experiments 
as well as in a mouse model of bladder inflammation. Radiation treatment 
validated the role of DNA damage in the NLRP3-associated caspase 1-mediated 
IL-1β secretory phenotype. A protein array analysis identified IGF1 to be 
downstream of IL-1β signaling. IL-1β-induced detrusor proliferation and 
hypertrophy could be reversed with the use of Anakinra as well as an IGF1 
neutralizing antibody. IL-1β antagonists in current clinical practice can 
exploit the revealed mechanism for DNA damage-mediated muscular expansion.
