Whether the rheumatoid arthritis (RA) pathogenesis is regulated by microRNA 
(miRNA) is not entirely clear. In this study, we found that miR-375 was 
down-regulated significantly in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) in 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rat model compared with control. Because the 
web-based software TargetScan and PicTar predict Frizzled 8 (FZD8) as the target 
of miR-375, we investigated whether up-regulated miR-375 plays a role in the 
activation of the canonical Wnt signaling by targeting the FZD8. Furthermore, 
the purpose of the present experiments was also to determine the role of miR-375 
in the pathogenesis of AIA rat model and to ascertain the effects of FZD8 in 
this process. Real time qPCR, Western blotting, ELISA and ChIP assay were used 
to assess the inhibited role of miR-375 in the pathogenesis of AIA rat model and 
the canonical Wnt signaling. RNA interference was also used to detect the role 
of knockdown of dephosphorylated β-catenin. Luciferase reporter gene and related 
methods were performed to determine the FZD8 as the target of miR-375. The 
increased miR-375 inhibited the pathogenesis of AIA rat model as indicated by 
decreases in the several disease markers, such as MMP3 and fibronectin. 
Interestingly, miR-375 also inhibited the canonical Wnt signaling, and the 
stabilized form of β-catenin blocked the miR-375 effects. FZD8 was identified as 
the target of miR-375 in AIA rat model by the firefly luciferase reporter gene. 
In summary, our results demonstrate that miR-375 regulates the pathogenesis of 
AIA rat model through the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. This discovery may 
provide new targets for therapeutic intervention to benefit RA patients.

Copyright © 2015 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
