The mechanisms underlying rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-induced pain are still not 
fully elucidated, and accumulating data indicate that peripheral inflammation is 
not the only factor driving pain in these patients. The focus of our work is to 
investigate the molecular basis for long-term alterations in nociceptive 
pathways induced by polyarthritis using the collagen antibody-induced arthritis 
(CAIA) mouse model. In this model, mechanical hypersensitivity outlasts the 
joint inflammation by weeks. Here we examined expression levels of 
neuropeptides, ion channels, and nerve injury markers associated with 
neuropathic and/or inflammatory pain in dorsal root ganglia (DRGs) and spinal 
cord both during the peak of inflammation (day 15) and when the inflammation has 
resolved but the hypersensitivity persists (days 45-47). No apparent differences 
were observed in substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide, or neuropeptide Y 
protein expression in DRGs and spinal cord of CAIA mice. However, the 
neuropeptide galanin, the ATP-gated ion channel P2X3, and calcium channel 
subunit α2δ1 were significantly increased in the CAIA DRGs as compared to 
controls, both 15 and 47 days after induction of arthritis. On day 15 there was 
an increase in expression of two factors associated with nerve injury and cell 
stress, activating transcription factor 3 and growth-associated protein 43 in 
DRGs, whereby the latter was still dramatically upregulated after 47 days. In 
conclusion, this study suggests that long-term joint inflammation has an impact 
on DRG neurons that resembles both inflammation and nerve injury-induced pain 
states. Thus, antibody-driven inflammation generates a pain state with a unique 
neurochemical profile.
