OBJECTIVE: A hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the chronic pain that 
accompanies inflammation and joint deformation. Patients with RA rate pain 
relief as the highest priority; however, few studies have addressed the efficacy 
and safety of therapies directed specifically toward pain pathways. The 
Ï‰-conotoxin MVIIA (ziconotide) is used in humans to alleviate persistent pain 
syndromes, because it specifically blocks the voltage-gated calcium 2.2 (CaV 
2.2) channel, which mediates the release of neurotransmitters and 
proinflammatory mediators from peripheral nociceptor nerve terminals. The aims 
of this study were to investigate whether blockade of CaV 2.2 can suppress 
arthritis pain, and to examine the progression of induced arthritis during 
persistent CaV 2.2 blockade.
METHODS: Transgenic mice expressing a membrane-tethered form of MVIIA under the 
control of a nociceptor-specific gene (MVIIA-transgenic mice) were used in the 
experiments. The mice were subjected to unilateral induction of joint 
inflammation using a combination of antigen and collagen.
RESULTS: CaV 2.2 blockade mediated by tethered MVIIA effectively suppressed 
arthritis-induced pain; however, in contrast to their wild-type littermates, 
which ultimately regained use of their injured joint as inflammation subsided, 
MVIIA-transgenic mice showed continued inflammation, with up-regulation of the 
osteoclast activator RANKL and concomitant joint and bone destruction.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results indicate that alleviation of peripheral 
pain by blockade of CaV 2.2- mediated calcium influx and signaling in nociceptor 
sensory neurons impairs recovery from induced arthritis and point to the 
potentially devastating effects of using CaV 2.2 channel blockers as analgesics 
during inflammation.
