Indomethacin (IMC), a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, has been used in the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), although its clinical use has been 
limited by its systemic side effects that include gastrointestinal lesions. 
Therefore, the development of IMC formulations that do not cause 
gastrointestinal lesions is highly anticipated. In this study, we designed new 
topical formulations containing IMC solid nanoparticles (IMCnano gel ointment), 
and investigated their pharmacokinetics. In addition, we demonstrate the 
preventive effects of this topical application of IMC nanoparticles on 
inflammation in adjuvant-induced arthritis rat (AA rat). The IMCnano gel 
ointment was prepared using Bead Smash 12 (a bead mill) and additives including 
2-hydroxypropyl-β-cyclodextrin, methylcellulose and Carbopol 934; the mean 
particle size of the IMC nanoparticles was 173 ± 91 nm (means ± S.D.). The 
application of the IMCnano gel ointment attenuated the increase in paw edema of 
the hind feet of AA rats in comparison with AA rats treated with gel ointment 
containing IMC microparticles (IMCmicro gel ointment, particle diameter 17.1 ± 
11.6 mm, means ± S.D). In addition, the accumulation of IMC from the IMCnano gel 
ointment in skin tissue was significantly large than for the IMCmicro gel 
ointment; however, the plasma IMC concentrations were similar for the IMCmicro 
and IMCnano gel ointments. Our findings suggest that the dermal application of 
nanoparticles may enable a medication to be applied without high-systemic drug 
levels, which could provide efficient and effective therapy that spares patients 
from unwanted side effects. A formulation of a topical drug delivery system 
using IMC nanoparticles may provide a delivery option for the clinical treatment 
of RA.
