Traditional treatments, including a variety of thermal therapies have been known 
since ancient times to provide relief from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) symptoms. 
However, a general absence of information on how heating affects molecular or 
immunological targets relevant to RA has limited heat treatment (HT) to the 
category of treatments known as "alternative therapies". In this study, we 
evaluated the effectiveness of mild HT in a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
model which has been used in many previous studies to evaluate newer 
pharmacological approaches for the treatment of RA, and tested whether 
inflammatory immune activity was altered. We also compared the effect of HT to 
methotrexate, a well characterized pharmacological treatment for RA. CIA mice 
were treated with either a single HT for several hours or daily 30 minute HT. 
Disease progression and macrophage infiltration were evaluated. We found that 
both HT regimens significantly reduced arthritis disease severity and macrophage 
infiltration into inflamed joints. Surprisingly, HT was as efficient as 
methotrexate in controlling disease progression. At the molecular level, HT 
suppressed TNF-α while increasing production of IL-10. We also observed an 
induction of HSP70 and a reduction in both NF-κB and HIF-1α in inflamed tissues. 
Additionally, using activated macrophages in vitro, we found that HT reduced 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, an effect which is correlated to 
induction of HSF-1 and HSP70 and inhibition of NF-κB and STAT activation. Our 
findings demonstrate a significant therapeutic benefit of HT in controlling 
arthritis progression in a clinically relevant mouse model, with an efficacy 
similar to methotrexate. Mechanistically, HT targets highly relevant 
anti-inflammatory pathways which strongly support its increased study for use in 
clinical trials for RA.
