BACKGROUND: The development of biologics has greatly increased the quality of 
life and the life expectancy of many patients with rheumatoid arthritis. 
However, a large number of these patients have an increased risk of developing 
serious infections. The aim of this study was to examine differential effects of 
anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) treatment and CTLA4 immunoglobulin (Ig) 
treatment on both immunological response and host defense in a murine model of 
septic arthritis.
METHODS: Abatacept (CTLA4-Ig), etanercept (anti-TNF), or phosphate-buffered 
saline were given to NMRI mice intravenously inoculated with Staphylococcus 
aureus. The clinical course of septic arthritis and histopathological and 
radiological changes of joints were compared among the groups.
RESULTS: Mice receiving CTLA4-Ig treatment had more-severe septic arthritis, 
compared with controls and mice receiving anti-TNF treatment. Anti-TNF treatment 
led to more-severe weight loss and kidney abscesses, as well as a higher 
bacterial burden in the kidneys. Mice receiving CTLA4-Ig therapy had lower serum 
levels of interleukin 4, whereas mice receiving anti-TNF therapy had higher 
levels of TNF-α. Both iNOS and arginase-1 expression were reduced in peritoneal 
macrophages from mice receiving CTLA4-Ig, compared with expression in the 
anti-TNF group.
CONCLUSIONS: CTLA4-Ig therapy significantly increased the susceptibility to S. 
aureus septic arthritis in mice, whereas anti-TNF therapy deteriorated host 
bacterial clearance, resulting in more-severe weight loss and kidney abscesses.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
