The interleukin-1β-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and NF-κB signaling 
pathways are involved in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. Ebosin, a 
novel exopolysaccharide (EPS), exhibits anti-inflammatory activity in rat 
collagen-induced arthritis by suppressing the production of tumor necrosis 
factor-α, interleukin-6 and interleukin-1β. The aim of the present study was to 
assess the effects of ebosin on NF-κB and MAPK signaling pathways mediated 
through interleukin-1β in rat fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs). Western 
blotting showed decreased production of phosphorylated p38, JNK1, JNK2, IKKα, 
IKKβ and IκB in the cytoplasm and NF-κB in the nucleus upon ebosin treatment. 
The DNA-binding activity of NF-κB in the cell nucleus was also inhibited by 
ebosin treatment, as demonstrated using an electrophoresis mobility gel shift 
assay. Analysis of the results of the immunofluorescence assay also showed a 
reduced amount of NF-κB in the nucleus of cells affected by ebosin. These 
results provided evidence for the effects of ebosin on both 
interleukin-1β-mediated MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways in rat FLSs. In 
addition, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay demonstrated that ebosin reduces the 
levels of matrix metalloproteinases MMP-1 and MMP-3 and the chemokines, 
interleukin-8 and RANTES. Thus, the results of the present study provide further 
evidence for understanding the medicinal activity of ebosin at a molecular 
level, therefore nominating this EPS as a potential therapeutic candidate for 
the treatment of rheumatic arthritis.Cellular & Molecular Immunology advance 
online publication, 4 May 2015; doi:10.1038/cmi.2015.36.
