Polyreactive innate-type B cells account for many B cells expressing 
self-reactivity in the periphery. Improper regulation of these B cells may be an 
important factor that underlies autoimmune disease. Here we have explored the 
influence of self-reactive innate B cells in the development of collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis. We show that splenic 
marginal zone (MZ), but not B-1 B cells exhibit spontaneous IgM reactivity to 
autologous collagen II in naı¨ve mice. Upon immunization with heterologous 
collagen II in complete Freund's adjuvant the collagen-reactive MZ B cells 
expanded rapidly, while the B-1 B cells showed a modest anti-collagen response. 
The MZ B cells were easily activated by toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 and 9-ligands 
in vitro, inducing proliferation and cytokine secretion, implying that dual 
engagement of the B-cell receptor and TLRs may promote the immune response to 
self-antigen. Furthermore, collagen-primed MZ B cells showed significant 
antigen-presenting capacity as reflected by cognate T-cell proliferation in 
vitro and induction of IgG anti-collagen antibodies in vivo. MZ B cells that 
were deficient in complement receptors 1 and 2 demonstrated increased 
proliferation and cytokine production, while Fcγ receptor IIb deficiency of the 
cells lead to increased cytokine production and antigen presentation. In 
conclusion, our data highlight self-reactive MZ B cells as initiators of the 
autoimmune response in CIA, where complement and Fc receptors are relevant in 
controlling the self-reactivity in the cells.
