Fish oil rich in docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) has beneficial effects on human 
health. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids are precursors of eicosanoids and 
docosanoids, signaling molecules that control inflammation and immunity, and 
their dietary uptake improves a range of disorders including cardiovascular 
diseases, ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid arthritis, and psoriasis. The 
unsaturated nature of these fatty acids, however, makes them prone to oxidation, 
especially when they are incorporated into (membrane) phospholipids. The skin is 
an organ strongly exposed to oxidative stress, mainly due to solar ultraviolet 
radiation. Thus, increased levels of PUFA in combination with oxidative stress 
could cause increased local generation of oxidized lipids, whose action spectrum 
reaches from signaling molecules to reactive carbonyl compounds that can 
crosslink biomolecules. Here, we investigated whether PUFA supplements to 
fibroblasts are incorporated into membrane phospholipids and whether an increase 
of PUFA within phospholipids affects the responses of the cells to UV exposure. 
The redox-sensitive transcription factor Nrf2 is the major regulator of the 
fibroblast stress response to ultraviolet radiation or exposure to oxidized 
lipids. Here we addressed how Nrf2 signaling would be affected in 
PUFA-supplemented human dermal fibroblasts and mouse dermal fibroblasts from 
Nrf2-deficient and wild type mice. We found, using HPLC-tandem MS, that DHA 
supplements to culture media of human and murine fibroblasts were readily 
incorporated into phospholipids and that subsequent irradiation of the 
supplemented cells with UVA resulted in an increase in 
1-palmitoyl-2-(epoxyisoprostane-E2)-sn-glycero-3-phosphorylcholine and Oxo-DHA 
esterified to phospholipid, both of which are Nrf2 agonists. Also, induction of 
Nrf2 target genes was enhanced in the DHA-supplemented fibroblasts after UVA 
irradiation. In Nrf2-deficient murine fibroblasts, the expression of the target 
genes was, as expected, decreased, but surprisingly, expression of TNFÎ± and 
MMP13 was strongly induced in DHA-supplemented, UVA-irradiated cells. Also, 
Nrf2-deficient cells had increased levels of oxidized phospholipids relative to 
the unoxidized precursors after UVA irradiation. Our data suggest that under 
ultraviolet stress a functioning Nrf2 system is required to prevent DHA-induced 
inflammation and matrix degradation in dermal fibroblasts.
