Glucocorticoids (GC) are steroid hormones, which regulate metabolism and immune 
function. Synthetic GCs, or corticosteroids (CS), have appreciable clinical 
utility via their ability to suppress inflammation in immune-mediated diseases 
like asthma and rheumatoid arthritis. Recent work has provided insight to novel 
GC-induced genes that mediate their anti-inflammatory effects, including 
glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper (GILZ). Since GILZ comprises an important 
part of GC action, its regulation by both drug and hormone will influence CS 
therapy. In addition, GILZ expression is often employed as a biomarker of GC 
action, which requires judicious selection of sampling time. Understanding the 
in vivo regulation of GILZ mRNA expression over time will provide insight into 
both the physiological regulation of GILZ by endogenous GC and the dynamics of 
its enhancement by CS. A highly quantitative qRT-PCR assay was developed for 
measuring GILZ mRNA expression in tissues obtained from normal and CS-treated 
rats. This assay was applied to measure GILZ mRNA expression in eight tissues; 
to determine its endogenous regulation over time; and to characterize its 
dynamics in adipose tissue, muscle, and liver following treatment with CS. We 
demonstrate that GILZ mRNA is expressed in several tissues. GILZ mRNA expression 
in adipose tissue displayed a robust circadian rhythm that was entrained with 
the circadian oscillation of endogenous corticosterone; and is strongly enhanced 
by acute and chronic dosing. Single dosing also enhanced GILZ mRNA in muscle and 
liver, but the dynamics varied. In conclusion, GILZ is widely expressed in the 
rat and highly regulated by endogenous and exogenous GCs.

Â© 2015 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.
