The precise cause of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis remains 
uncertain. Collagen induced arthritis (CIA) in animals is the most commonly used 
model of human rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Exposure of humans and animals to 
toxic metals is widespread. Cadmium is one of the most prevalent nephrotoxic 
heavy metal, but it may cause other systemic toxicity as well. Cadmium may cause 
adverse health effects by impairment of the immune systems and induction of 
reactive oxygen species. Since rheumatoid arthritis pathogenesis involve immune 
system disorder and chronic inflammation, the present study has been designed to 
find out the effect of cadmium chloride exposure on clinical manifestation of 
development of collagen induced rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis was induced in 
rats by intradermal injection of emulsion of type II collagen in Complete 
Freund's Adjuvant. Rats were treated with cadmium chloride dissolved in drinking 
water at concentrations of 5ppm and 50ppm for 21 days from day of immunization. 
The effects of cadmium in the rats were assessed by biochemical parameters 
(articular elastase, articular nitrite, lipid peroxidation, reduced glutathione, 
catalase and superoxide dismutase) histopathological analysis and 
immunohistochemical expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in rat joint 
tissue. Histopathological changes further confirmed the biochemical and 
immunohistochemical results. Our results suggest that exposure to cadmium 
chloride during the induction phase of collagen induced arthritis abrogate 
disease development at lower dose whereas exacerbates at higher dose in Wistar 
rats.
