Periodontitis has been associated with rheumatoid arthritis. In experimental 
arthritis, concomitant periodontitis caused by oral infection with Porphyromonas 
gingivalis enhances articular bone loss. The aim of this study was to 
investigate how lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from P. gingivalis stimulates bone 
resorption. The effects by LPS P. gingivalis and four other TLR2 ligands on bone 
resorption, osteoclast formation, and gene expression in wild type and 
Tlr2-deficient mice were assessed in ex vivo cultures of mouse parietal bones 
and in an in vivo model in which TLR2 agonists were injected subcutaneously over 
the skull bones. LPS P. gingivalis stimulated mineral release and matrix 
degradation in the parietal bone organ cultures by increasing differentiation 
and formation of mature osteoclasts, a response dependent on increased RANKL 
(receptor activator of NF-κB ligand). LPS P. gingivalis stimulated RANKL in 
parietal osteoblasts dependent on the presence of TLR2 and through a MyD88 and 
NF-κB-mediated mechanism. Similarly, the TLR2 agonists HKLM, FSL1, Pam2, and 
Pam3 stimulated RANKL in osteoblasts and parietal bone resorption. LPS P. 
gingivalis and Pam2 robustly enhanced osteoclast formation in 
periosteal/endosteal cell cultures by increasing RANKL. LPS P. gingivalis and 
Pam2 also up-regulated RANKL and osteoclastic genes in vivo, resulting in an 
increased number of periosteal osteoclasts and immense bone loss in wild type 
mice but not in Tlr2-deficient mice. These data demonstrate that LPS P. 
gingivalis stimulates periosteal osteoclast formation and bone resorption by 
stimulating RANKL in osteoblasts via TLR2. This effect might be important for 
periodontal bone loss and for the enhanced bone loss seen in rheumatoid 
arthritis patients with concomitant periodontal disease.
