Folate receptor (FR)-Î² has been identified as a promising target for 
antimacrophage and antiinflammatory therapies. In the present study, we 
investigated EC0565, a folic acid-derivative of everolimus, as a FR-specific 
inhibitor of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). Because of its 
amphiphilic nature, EC0565 was first evaluated for water solubility, critical 
micelle formation, stability in culture and FR-binding specificity. Using 
FR-expressing macrophages, the effect of EC0565 on mTOR signaling and cellular 
proliferation was studied. The pharmacokinetics, metabolism and bioavailability 
of EC0565 were studied in normal rats. The in vivo activity of EC0565 was 
assessed in rats with adjuvant arthritis, a "macrophage-rich" model with close 
resemblance to rheumatoid arthritis. EC0565 forms micellar aggregates in 
physiological buffers and demonstrates good water solubility as well as strong 
multivalent FR-binding capacity. EC0565 inhibited mTOR signaling in rat 
macrophages at nanomolar concentrations and induced G0/G1 cell cycle arrest in 
serum-starved RAW264.7 cells. Subcutaneously administered EC0565 in rats 
displayed good bioavailability and a relatively long half-life (~12 h). When 
given at 250 nmol/kg, EC0565 selectively inhibited proliferating cell nuclear 
antigen expression in thioglycollate-stimulated rat peritoneal cells. With 
limited dosing regimens, the antiarthritic activity of EC0565 was found superior 
to that of etanercept, everolimus and a nontargeted everolimus analog. The in 
vivo activity of EC0565 was also comparable to that of a folate-targeted 
aminopterin. Folate-targeted mTOR inhibition may be an effective way of 
suppressing activated macrophages in sites of inflammation, especially in 
nutrient-deprived conditions, such as in the arthritic joints. Further 
investigation and improvement upon the physical and biochemical properties of 
EC0565 are warranted.
