Methotrexate (MTX), a well known drug for the treatment of cancer and rheumatoid 
arthritis, has gained prominence in the treatment of psoriasis over the period 
of years. However, the present mode of systemic administration through oral or 
parenteral route has always proposition, full of compromises. The toxicity of 
drug to the vital organs and physiological environment is the major concern. 
Also, its poor skin penetration is one major problem. Hence novel system based 
on lipid carriers has been considered here to overcome the barriers. 
Microemulsions (MEs) were prepared using pseudo-ternary phase diagram (PTPD) and 
they were characterized for various parameters such as size, shape (cryo-SEM), 
PDI, zeta potential, etc. The chosen MEs system (optimized) was then 
incorporated into secondary vehicles and characterized for rheological behavior, 
texture profile analysis, in vitro release, ex vivo permeation and drug 
distribution into different layers of skin. The developed formulations were 
further evaluated in ex vivo and in vivo such as cell line study, 
imiquimod-induced psoriatic model, allergic contact dermatitis, rat tail model 
(% orthokeratosis) and safety test (Draize test). The MEs based MTX gel has 
shown its potential in locating the drug at the desired domain of stratum 
corneum, epidermal and dermal layers of skin and reducing systemic absorption. 
Our results are suggestive of MEs potential as a novel carrier for topical 
delivery of MTX in topical therapeutic and safety approaches. In conclusion, 
developed MEs-based hydrogel has shown promising results in achieving effective 
delivery of MTX.
