Stimulating fibroblast-like synoviocyte (FLS) apoptosis in rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) is a promising strategy for clinical treatment. Previous studies have 
confirmed that geniposide shows a certain anti-arthritic effect in vivo. 
However, whether geniposide can induce RA FLS apoptosis and the underlying 
mechanisms has not been elucidated. Herein, adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in 
rat was induced and FLS was isolated from synovial tissues by tissue explant 
cultivation method. MTT assay, Hoechst staining, and flow cytometric apoptosis 
assay were applied to evaluate apoptotic effect of geniposide on AIA FLS. Bcl-2, 
Bax, and caspase 3 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels, and 
extracellular-signal-regulated kinases (ERKs) and phosphorylated ERK protein 
levels were examined by real-time PCR and western blot, respectively. We found 
that geniposide dose-dependently inhibited AIA FLS proliferation in vitro. AIA 
FLS treated with geniposide displayed typical apoptotic morphological 
characteristics including nuclear shrinkage and chromatin condensation. Flow 
cytometric apoptosis assay indicated that geniposide significantly increased the 
apoptosis rate of AIA FLS. Additionally, geniposide treatment on AIA FLS 
decreased Bcl-2 mRNA level and increased Bax and caspase 3 mRNA levels, 
accompanied by reduced protein levels of phosphorylated-ERK1/2, without 
affecting total ERK1/2. In conclusion, geniposide effectively induces AIA FLS 
apoptosis through regulating the apoptosis-related gene expressions and 
inhibiting ERK signal pathway.
