Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a challenging autoimmune disorder, whose treatments 
usually cause severe gastrointestinal, renal and other complications. We aimed 
to evaluate the beneficial anti-arthritic effects of an angiotensin converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, ramipril and a dopamine receptor blocker, haloperidol, 
on Complete Freund's Adjuvant-induced RA in adult female albino rats. Rats were 
allocated into a normal control group, an arthritis control group, two reference 
treatment groups receiving dexamethasone (1.5 mg/kg/day) and methotrexate (1 
mg/kg/day), and two treatment groups receiving ramipril (0.9 mg/kg/day) and 
haloperidol (1 mg/kg/day). Serum rheumatoid factor, matrix metalloprotinease-3 
(MMP-3) and cartilage oligomeric matrix protein as specific rheumatoid 
biomarkers, serum immunoglobulin G and antinuclear antibody as immunological 
biomarkers, serum tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin-10 (IL-10) 
as immunomodulatory cytokines, serum myeloperoxidase and C-reactive protein as 
inflammatory biomarkers, as well as malondialdehyde and glutathione reduced 
(GSH) as oxidative stress biomarkers were assessed. A histopathological study on 
joints and spleens was performed to support the results of biochemical 
estimations. Ramipril administration significantly corrected all the measured 
biomarkers, being restored back to normal levels except for MMP-3, TNF-α and 
IL-10. Haloperidol administration restored all the measured biomarkers back to 
normal levels except for TNF-α, IL-10 and GSH. In conclusion, ACE inhibitors 
represented by ramipril and dopamine receptor blockers represented by 
haloperidol may represent new promising protective strategies against RA, at 
least owing to their immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory and antioxidant 
potentials.
