Anti-CD52 therapy has been shown to be effective in the treatment of a number of 
B cell malignancies, hematopoietic disorders and autoimmune diseases (including 
rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis); however the current standard of 
treatment, the humanized monoclonal antibody alemtuzumab, is associated with the 
development of anti-drug antibodies in a high proportion of patients. In order 
to address this problem, we have identified a novel murine anti-CD52 antibody 
which has been humanized using a process that avoids the inclusion within the 
variable domains of non-human germline MHC class II binding peptides and known 
CD4+ T cell epitopes, thus reducing its potential for immunogenicity in the 
clinic. The resultant humanized antibody, ANT1034, was shown to have superior 
binding to CD52 expressing cells than alemtuzumab and was more effective at 
directing both antibody dependent and complement dependent cell cytotoxicity. 
Furthermore, when in the presence of a cross-linking antibody, ANT1034 was more 
effective at directly inducing apoptosis than alemtuzumab. ANT1034 also showed 
superior activity in a SCID mouse/human CD52 tumour xenograft model where a 
single 1 mg/Kg dose of ANT1034 led to increased mouse survival compared to a 10 
mg/Kg dose of alemtuzumab. Finally, ANT1034 was compared to alemtuzumab in in 
vitro T cell assays in order to evaluate its potential to stimulate 
proliferation of T cells in peripheral blood mononuclear cells derived from a 
panel of human donors: whereas alemtuzumab stimulated proliferation in a high 
proportion of the donor cohort, ANT1034 did not stimulate proliferation in any 
of the donors. Therefore we have developed a candidate therapeutic humanized 
antibody, ANT1034, that may have the potential to be more efficacious and less 
immunogenic than the current standard anti-CD52 therapy.
