A patient with rheumatoid arthritis developed rhabdomyolysis while undergoing 
treatment with mizoribine concomitantly with bezafibrate. The symptoms rapidly 
disappeared and laboratory test results normalized when she discontinued the two 
drugs. The purpose of the present study was to elucidate the 
transporter-mediated molecular pharmacokinetic mechanisms of drug-drug 
interactions between bezafibrate and mizoribine. Comparing 
bezafibrate-mizoribine group with bezafibrate group, the Tmax and Cmax of 
bezafibrate were essentially unchanged in rats. The AUC of bezafibrate was 
significantly increased and t1/2Î² was prolonged markedly with an obviously 
reduction in plasma clearance and cumulative urinary excretion. The changes were 
similar to oral studies following intravenous co-administration. In rat kidney 
slices, the uptake of bezafibrate was markedly inhibited by p-aminohippurate, 
benzylpenicillin and probenecid but not by tetraethyl ammonium. Mizoribine not 
only decreased the uptake of bezafibrate, but also inhibited the uptake of 
p-aminohippurate and benzylpenicillin. The uptakes of bezafibrate and mizoribine 
were significantly higher compared to vector-HEK293 cells. The uptakes of 
bezafibrate and mizoribine in highest concentration were increased 1.63 and 1.46 
folds in hOAT1-transfected cells, 1.43 and 1.24 folds in hOAT3-transfected 
cells, respectively. The Km values of bezafibrate uptake by 
hOAT1/3hOAT1-/hOAT3-HEK293 K293 cells were increased 1.68 fold in hOAT1-HEK293 
cell and 2.12 fold in hOAT3-HEK293 cell in the presence of mizoribine with no 
change of Vmax. It indicated that mizoribine could inhibit the uptake of 
bezafibrate by hOAT1/3-HEK293 cells in a competitive way. In conclusion, OAT1 
and OAT3 are the target transporters of drug-drug interactions between 
bezafibrate and mizoribine in pharmacokinetic aspects.
