OBJECTIVE: The objective of the present study was to investigate the effect of 
rheumatoid arthritis and functional loading through diet modification on the 
biochemical properties of the mandibular condyle in a transgenic mouse model and 
compare with healthy littermates.
DESIGN: Twenty three, 4-week old hybrid male mice were used. Eleven were of 
transgenic line hTNF 197 (Tg 197 - with rheumatoid arthritis - RA) and 12 
healthy littermates, both from mixed background CBAxC57BL/6. Four groups of mice 
were formed. Group 1 [n =5, RA-hard] included transgenic mice and received 
ordinary (hard) diet; group 2 [n=6, RA-soft] included transgenic line and 
received soft diet; group 3 [n=6, control-hard] were healthy littermates 
receiving ordinary (hard) diet and group 4 [n=6, control-soft] were healthy 
littermates with soft diet. Experimental period was 28 days. Following 
sacrifice, the mandibular condyles were subjected to micro-attenuated reflection 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (micro-ATR FTIR) to reveal 
collagen/proteoglycan conformation of the condylar cartilage, while 
resin-embedded and metallographically polished specimens were evaluated through 
reflection FTIR microscopy to identify mineralization status of the 
corresponding condylar bone.
RESULTS: The multivariable analysis revealed significantly lower a-helix to 
amide I percentage area ratio for the transgenic animals after adjusting for 
diet (Î²=-4.29, 95% CIs: -8.52, -0.06; p=0.04). Mineral phase indices did not 
differ significantly between RA and control groups regardless the type of diet.
CONCLUSIONS: Internal derangement of the anatomical structure with denaturation 
in the collagen structural components of the mandibular condyles of the RA 
animals was found, while no association with functional loading through diet 
modification was recorded.
