Pro-inflammatory cytokine-induced chondrocyte apoptosis is a primary cause of 
cartilage destruction in the progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Advanced 
oxidation protein products (AOPPs), a novel pro-inflammatory mediator, have been 
confirmed to accumulate in patients with RA. However, the effect of AOPPs 
accumulation on chondrocyte apoptosis and the associated cellular mechanisms 
remains unclear. The present study demonstrated that the plasma formation of 
AOPPs was enhanced in RA rats compared with normal. Then, chondrocyte were 
treated with AOPPs-modified rat serum albumin (AOPPs-RSA) in vitro. Exposure of 
chondrocyte to AOPPs activated nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
(NADPH) oxidase and increased expression of NADPH oxidase subunits, which was 
mediated by receptor for advanced glycation end products (RAGE), but not 
scavenger receptor CD36. Moreover, AOPPs challenge triggered NADPH 
oxidase-dependent ROS generation which induced mitochondrial dysfunction and 
endoplasmic reticulum stress resulted in activation of caspase family that 
eventually lead to apoptosis. Lastly, blockade of RAGE, instead of CD36, largely 
attenuated these signals. Our study demonstrated first time that AOPPs induce 
chondrocyte apoptosis via RAGE-mediated and redox-dependent intrinsic apoptosis 
pathway in vitro. These data implicates that AOPPs may represent a novel 
pathogenic factor that contributes to RA progression. Targeting AOPPs-triggered 
cellular mechanisms might emerge as a promising therapeutic option for patients 
with RA.
