Treatment with helminthes and helminthes ova improved the clinical symptoms of 
several autoimmune diseases in patients and in animal models. Phosphorylcholine 
(PC) proved to be the immunomodulatory molecule. We aimed to decipher the 
tolerogenic potential of tuftsin-PC (TPC), a novel helminth-based compound in 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). CIA 
DBA/1 mice were treated with TPC subcutaneously (5 µg/0.1 ml) or orally (250 
µg/0.1 ml), starting prior to disease induction. The control groups were treated 
with PBS. Collagen antibodies were tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), cytokine protein levels by ELISA kits and regulatory T (Treg ) and 
regulatory B (Breg ) cell phenotypes by fluorescence-activated cell sorter 
(FACS). TPC-treated mice had a significantly lower arthritis score of 1.5 in 
comparison with control mice 11.8 (P < 0.0001) in both subcutaneous and orally 
treated groups at day 31. Moreover, histology analysis demonstrated highly 
inflamed joints in control mice, whereas TPC-treated mice maintained normal 
joint structure. Furthermore, TPC decreased the titres of circulating collagen 
II antibodies in mice sera (P < 0.0001), enhanced expression of IL-10 
(P < 0.0001) and inhibited production of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α, 
interleukin (IL)-17 and IL-1β (P < 0.0001). TPC significantly expanded the 
CD4(+) CD25(+) forkhead box protein 3 (FoxP3(+) ) Treg cells and CD19(+) 
IL-10(+) CD5(high) CD1d(high) T cell immunoglobulin mucin-1 (TIM-1(+) ) Breg 
cell phenotypes (P < 0.0001) in treated mice. Our data indicate that treatment 
with TPC attenuates CIA in mice demonstrated by low arthritic score and normal 
joints histology. TPC treatment reduced proinflammatory cytokines and increased 
anti-inflammatory cytokine expression, as well as expansion of Treg and Breg 
cells. Our results may lead to a new approach for a natural therapy for early 
rheumatoid arthritis onset.
