Tetrandrine is an alkaloid constituent of the root of Stephania tetrandra S. 
Moore. The long-term clinical uses of tetrandrine for treatments of rheumatalgia 
and arthralgia as well as the inhibition of rat adjuvant-induced arthritis imply 
that tetrandrine may have therapeutic potential in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 
Here, we explored its anti-RA mechanism in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in 
relation to the balance between T helper (Th) 17 cells and regulatory T (Treg) 
cells. DBA/1 mice were immunized with chicken type II collagen and were orally 
administered tetrandrine for 14 consecutive days. Then, the mice were 
sacrificed, their joints were removed for histological analysis, and spleens and 
mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) were removed to examine the Th17 and Treg cells. 
Tetrandrine markedly alleviated the severity of arthritis, reduced the serum 
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and restored the Th17/Treg balance, as 
demonstrated by the serum levels of their related cytokines (IL-17 and IL-10) 
and the proportion of each cell type. Tetrandrine inhibited Th17 cell 
differentiation and induced Treg cell differentiation in vitro . Notably, aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) was proven to play a crucial role in 
tetrandrine-mediated T cell differentiation. The correlation between AhR 
activation, regulation of Th17/Treg and amelioration of arthritis by tetrandrine 
was verified in the CIA mice. Moreover, tetrandrine might be a ligand of AhR 
because it facilitated the expression of the AhR target gene cytochrome P450 1A1 
(CYP1A1) and the activation of its downstream signaling pathways. Taken 
together, tetrandrine exerts its anti-arthritis efficacy by restoring Th17/Treg 
balance via AhR.
