BACKGROUND: Evidence is accumulating that a preclinical phase is present before 
the onset of clinical signs and symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). This 
phase represents an important therapeutic window within which interventions can 
dramatically modulate outcomes. An agent able to prevent RA for high risk 
individuals in this phase is therefore desired. In this study, we investigated 
whether tryptophan metabolite, 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) or 
5-methoxytryptophan (5-MTP), can act as such an agent for primary prevention of 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: Mouse splenocytes were pretreated with 5-HTP or 5-MTP and activated by 
anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 antibodies in vitro. The percentages of interferon-γ 
(IFNγ)(+)CD4(+) T cells and interleukin-17 (IL-17)(+)CD4(+) T cells were 
measured by flow cytometry. The production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, 
serotonin and kynurenine was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. A 
CIA model was used to investigate the in vivo effects of 5-HTP on the prevention 
of arthritis.
RESULTS: 5-HTP decreased the percentages of IFNγ(+)CD4(+) T cells and 
IL-17(+)CD4(+) T cells and suppressed the production of IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-17, 
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) and IFNγ in activated splenocytes. 5-HTP 
administered before induction decreased the disease activities in CIA mice and 
suppressed the production of TNFα, IL-6 and cyclooxygenase-2 in arthritic 
joints. 5-HTP also increased serotonin, but decreased kynurenine in the CIA 
mice.
CONCLUSIONS: 5-HTP suppresses inflammation and arthritis through decreasing the 
production of pro-inflammatory mediators. 5-HTP supplement before induction 
ameliorates arthritis in a CIA model.
