Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an immune-mediated disease with a pathogenesis that 
involves CD4 T cell activation. Multiple immune regulatory molecules expressed 
on CD4(+) T cells were involved in RA pathogenesis. In this study, we 
investigated the role of T cell immunoglobulin and ITIM (immunoreceptor 
tyrosine-based inhibition motif) domain (TIGIT) in RA. The frequency of 
TIGIT-positive CD4(+) T cells in the synovial fluid (SF) of active RA patients 
was lower than that of inactive RA patients. And a negative correlation between 
RA disease activity and TIGIT expression was found. In CD4(+) T cells isolated 
from SF of active RA patients, TIGIT upregulation significantly decreased cell 
proliferation, as shown by MTT assay. TIGIT overexpression also significantly 
decreased the production of IFN-γ and IL-17, and increased that of IL-10, as 
determined by ELISA and qRT-PCR. In CD4(+) T cells isolated from SF of inactive 
RA patients, TIGIT was silenced by siRNA transfection. As expected, TIGIT 
knockdown resulted in an opposite effect on cell proliferation and the 
production of cytokines, including IFN-γ, IL-17 and IL-10. A RA mouse model was 
established using type II collagen induction. TIGIT was upregulated in RA mouse 
by lentivector infection. As expected, TIGIT overexpression in vivo 
significantly alleviated the disease severity and deceased the levels of 
anti-collagen II antibodies. TIGIT upregulation in the early stage was more 
effective to alleviate disease severity. Our data suggested the potential 
therapeutic role of TIGIT in RA patients.
