Targeting activated macrophages using anti-inflammatory phytopharmaceuticals has 
been proposed as general therapeutic approaches for rheumatic diseases. Besides 
macrophages, chondrocytes are another promising target of anti-inflammatory 
agents. Tetrandrine is a major bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloid isolated from 
Stephania tetrandrae S. Moore which has been used for 2,000 years as an 
antirheumatic herbal drug in China. Although, the anti-inflammatory effect of 
tetrandrine has been demonstrated, the mechanism has not been clearly clarified. 
In this study, we designed a comprehensive anti-inflammatory evaluation system 
for tetrandrine, including complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA)-induced arthritis 
rat, LPS-induced macrophage RAW 264.7 cells, and chondrogenic ATDC5 cells. The 
results showed that tetrandrine alleviated CFA-induced foot swelling, synovial 
inflammation, and pro-inflammatory cytokines secretion. Tetrandrine could 
inhibit IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α expression via blocking the nuclear translocation 
of nuclear factor (NF)-κB p65 in LPS-induced RAW 264.7 cells. Moreover, ATDC5 
cells well responded to LPS induced pro-inflammatory mediators secretion and 
tissue degradation, and tetrandrine could also inhibit the production of nitric 
oxide and prostaglandin E2 , as well as the expression of matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP)-3 and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 via 
inhibiting IκBα phosphorylation and degradation. In conclusion, the results 
showed that one of the anti-inflammatory mechanisms of tetrandrine was 
inhibiting IκBα and NF-κB p65 phosphorylation in LPS-induced macrophage RAW 
264.7 cells and chondrogenic ATDC5 cells. Moreover, we introduce a vigorous in 
vitro cell screening system, LPS-induced murine macrophage RAW 264.7 cells 
coupling chondrogenic ADTC5 cells, for screening anti-rheumatic drugs. © 2016 
Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 
34:1557-1568, 2016.
