The current study was aimed to investigate the anti-inflammatory effect of 
triamcinolone acetonide-loaded hydroxyapatite (TA-loaded HAp) nanocomposites in 
the arthritic rat model. The HAp nanocomposites were synthesized through a 
chemical precipitation method and the drug was subsequently incorporated into 
the nanocomposites using an impregnation method. The physicochemical properties 
as well as cytotoxicity of the prepared nanoformulation were examined as well. 
To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of the prepared nanoformulation, the 
various parameters such as paw volume, haematological parameters and 
histological studies were assessed in the arthritic rats. The nanocomposites 
with the particle size of 70.45 nm, pore size of 2.71 nm and drug loading of 
41.94% were obtained in this study. The specific surface area (aBET) as well as 
the volume of nitrogen adsorbed on one gram of HAp to complete the monolayer 
adsorption (Vm) were decreased after the drug loading process. The prepared 
nanoformulation revealed the slower drug release profile compared to the pure 
drug. Furthermore, the obtained data from MTT assay showed that the TA-loaded 
nanocomposites had a lower cytotoxic effect on NIH-3T3 and CAOV-4 cell lines as 
compared to the pure drug. Furthermore, TA-loaded HAp nanocomposites 
demonstrated favorable effects on the paw volume as well as the haematological 
and histopathological abnormalities in the adjuvant-induced arthritic rats. 
Therefore, TA-loaded HAp nanocomposites are potentially suggested for treatment 
of rheumatoid arthritis after further required evaluations.
