Osteoclasts, derived from hematopoietic stem cells, are specialized macrophages 
and have a homeostatic role in skeletal modeling and remodeling with 
bone-forming osteoblasts. However, excessive osteoclast activity induces bone 
diseases, including osteoporosis, periodontitis and rheumatoid arthritis. 
Natural substances have received attention as therapeutic drugs in human 
diseases. In the current study, cells isolated from mouse bone marrow, and a 
mouse model, were used to determine the effect of centipedegrass extract (CGE) 
on osteoclasts. Multiple concentrations of CGE were administered to bone marrow 
cells for 24‑72 hours and, for the in vivo study, mice were treated with CGE for 
8 days. The effects of CGE on transcription and translation of 
osteoclast-associated molecules were then determined using reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and immunoblotting, respectively. In the 
present study it was shown that CGE extracted from Eremochloa ophiuroides 
(centipedegrass) inhibited receptor activator of nuclear factor κ‑B ligand 
(RANKL)‑mediated osteoclast differentiation in bone marrow macrophages, without 
cytotoxicity, in a dose‑dependent manner. CGE decreased the expression levels of 
osteoclast‑specific genes, including matrix metalloproteinase‑9, 
osteoclast‑associated immunoglobulin‑like receptor and cathepsin K, however, CGE 
had no inhibitory effect on the expression levels of mitogen‑activated protein 
kinases, nuclear factor‑κB and Akt. Furthermore, the protein and RNA levels of 
RANKL‑induced c‑Fos and nuclear factor of activated T-cell cytoplasmic 1 were 
suppressed by CGE. These results indicated that CGE may serve as a useful drug 
in the prevention of bone loss.
