Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory autoimmune condition, and tumor necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α) plays an important role in its pathophysiology. In vitro, 
(E)-N'-(3,4-dimethoxybenzylidene)-N-methylbenzohydrazide (LASSBio-1359) has 
exhibited anti-TNF-α properties, and in vivo these effects are mediated via 
activation of adenosine receptor. This work investigates the antinociceptive 
action of LASSBio-1359 in murine models of acute and chronic inflammatory pain. 
Male mice received an intraperitoneal injection of LASSBio-1359 and then were 
evaluated in formalin- and carrageenan-induced paw edema assays. Complete 
Freund's adjuvant (CFA) was used to induce a mouse model of monoarthritis. These 
mice were treated with LASSBio-1359 by oral gavage to evaluate thermal and 
mechanical hyperalgesia. TNF-α and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) 
expression as well as histologic features were analyzed. The time of reactivity 
to formalin in the neurogenic phase was reduced from 56.3 ± 6.0 seconds to 32.7 
± 2.2 seconds and 23.8 ± 2.6 seconds after treatment with LASSBio-1359 at doses 
of 10 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg, respectively. A reversal of the antinociceptive action 
of LASSBio-1359 was observed in the inflammatory phase after treatment with ZM 
241385 
[4-(2-[7-amino-2-(2-furly)[1,2,4]triazolo[2,3-a][1,3,5]triazin-5-ylamino]ethyl)phenol], 
an adenosine A2A antagonist. Carrageenan-induced thermal and mechanical 
hyperalgesia were reduced after treatment with LASSBio-1359. Similarly, 
CFA-induced thermal and mechanical hyperalgesia were reduced after treatment 
with LASSBio-1359 (25 and 50 mg/kg). Levels of TNF-α and iNOS expression 
increased in the monoarthritis model and were normalized in animals treated with 
LASSBio-1359, which was also associated with beneficial effects in the 
histologic analysis. These results suggest that LASSBio-1359 represents an 
alternative treatment of monoarthritis.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.
