Renal fibrosis is the common feature of chronic kidney disease and mainly 
mediated by TGFβ-associated pro-fibrogenic signaling, which causes excessive 
extracellular matrix accumulation and successive loss of kidney functions. 
Sinomenine (SIN), an alkaloid derived from medicinal herb extensively used in 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and various inflammatory disorders, displays 
renal protective properties in experimental animals; however its pharmacological 
potency against renal fibrosis is not explored. In this study we report that SIN 
possesses strong anti-renal fibrosis functions in kidney cell and in mouse 
fibrotic kidney. SIN beneficially modulated the pro-fibrogenic protein 
expression in TGFβ-treated kidney cells and attenuated the renal fibrotic 
pathogenesis incurred by unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO), which correlated 
with its activation of Nrf2 signaling - the key defender against oxidative 
stress with anti-fibrotic potentials. Further investigation on its regulation of 
Nrf2 downstream events revealed that SIN significantly balanced oxidative stress 
via improving the expression and activity of anti-oxidant and detoxifying 
enzymes, and interrupted the pro-fibrogenic signaling of TGFβ/Smad and 
Wnt/β-catenin. Even more impressively SIN achieved its anti-fibrotic activities 
in an Nrf2-dependent manner, suggesting that SIN regulation of Nrf2-associated 
anti-fibrotic activities constitutes a critical component of SIN's 
renoprotective functions. Collectively our studies have demonstrated a novel 
anti-fibrotic property of SIN and its upstream events and provided a molecular 
basis for SIN's potential applications in treatment of renal fibrosis-associated 
kidney disorders.
