BACKGROUND: To facilitate the development of therapies for rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), the Innovative Medicines Initiative BTCure has combined the experience 
from several laboratories worldwide to establish a series of protocols for 
different animal models of arthritis that reflect the pathogenesis of RA. Here, 
we describe chronic pristane-induced arthritis (PIA) model in DA rats, and 
provide detailed instructions to set up and evaluate the model and for reporting 
data.
METHODS: We optimized dose of pristane and immunization procedures and 
determined the effect of age, gender, and housing conditions. We further 
assessed cage-effects, reproducibility, and frequency of chronic arthritis, 
disease markers, and efficacy of standard and novel therapies.
RESULTS: Out of 271 rats, 99.6% developed arthritis after 
pristane-administration. Mean values for day of onset, day of maximum arthritis 
severity and maximum clinical scores were 11.8±2.0 days, 20.3±5.1 days and 
34.2±11 points on a 60-point scale, respectively. The mean frequency of chronic 
arthritis was 86% but approached 100% in long-term experiments over 110 days. 
Pristane was arthritogenic even at 5 microliters dose but needed to be 
administrated intradermally to induce robust disease with minimal variation. The 
development of arthritis was age-dependent but independent of gender and whether 
the rats were housed in conventional or barrier facilities. PIA correlated well 
with weight loss and acute phase reactants, and was ameliorated by etanercept, 
dexamethasone, cyclosporine A and fingolimod treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: PIA has high incidence and excellent reproducibility. The chronic 
relapsing-remitting disease and limited systemic manifestations make it more 
suitable than adjuvant arthritis for long-term studies of joint-inflammation and 
screening and validation of new therapeutics.
