Adjuvant-induced arthritis is an experimental model of rheumatoid arthritis that 
is associated with body weight loss and muscle wasting. β2-adrenergic receptor 
agonists are powerful anabolic agents that trigger skeletal muscle hypertrophy 
and have been proposed as a promising treatment for muscle wasting in human 
patients. The aim of this work was to determine whether formoterol, a selective 
β2-adrenoreceptor agonist, is able to ameliorate muscle wasting in arthritic 
rats. Arthritis was induced in male Wistar rats by intradermal injection of 
Freund's adjuvant. Control and arthritic rats were injected daily with 50 μg/kg 
sc formoterol or saline for 12 days. Body weight change, food intake, and 
arthritis index were analyzed. After euthanasia, in the gastrocnemius mRNA was 
analyzed by PCR, and proteins were analyzed by Western blotting. Arthritis 
decreased gastrocnemius weight, cross-sectional area, and myofiber size, whereas 
formoterol increased those variables in both arthritic and control rats. 
Formoterol decreased the external signs of arthritis as well as NF-κB(p65) 
activation, TNFα, and COX-2 levels in the gastrocnemius of arthritic and control 
rats. Those effects of formoterol were associated with a decreased expression of 
myostatin, atrogin-1, and MuRF1 and in LC3b lipidation. Arthritis increased the 
expression of MyoD, myogenin, IGF-I, and IGFBP-3 and -5 in the gastrocnemius. In 
control and in arthritic rats, treatment with formoterol increased Akt 
phosphorylation and myogenin levels, whereas it decreased IGFBP-3 expression in 
the gastrocnemius. These data suggest that formoterol has an anti-inflammatory 
effect and decreases muscle wasting in arthritic rats through increasing Akt 
activity and myogenin and decreasing myostatin, the p-NF-κB(p65)/TNF pathway, 
and IGFBP-3.
