OBJECTIVE: The intestinal microbiota is involved in the pathogenesis of 
arthritis. Altered microbiota composition has been demonstrated in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, it remains unclear how dysbiosis contributes 
to the development of arthritis. The aim of this study was to investigate 
whether altered composition of human intestinal microbiota in RA patients 
contributes to the development of arthritis.
METHODS: We analyzed the fecal microbiota of patients with early RA and healthy 
controls, using 16S ribosomal RNA-based deep sequencing. We inoculated fecal 
samples from RA patients and healthy controls into germ-free arthritis-prone SKG 
mice and evaluated the immune responses. We also analyzed whether the 
lymphocytes of SKG mice harboring microbiota from RA patients react with the 
arthritis-related autoantigen 60S ribosomal protein L23a (RPL23A).
RESULTS: A subpopulation of patients with early RA harbored intestinal 
microbiota dominated by Prevotella copri; SKG mice harboring microbiota from RA 
patients had an increased number of intestinal Th17 cells and developed severe 
arthritis when treated with zymosan. Lymphocytes in regional lymph nodes and the 
colon, but not the spleen, of these mice showed enhanced interleukin-17 (IL-17) 
responses to RPL23A. Naive SKG mouse T cells cocultured with P copri-stimulated 
dendritic cells produced IL-17 in response to RPL23A and rapidly induced 
arthritis.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated that dysbiosis increases sensitivity to arthritis 
via activation of autoreactive T cells in the intestine. Autoreactive SKG mouse 
T cells are activated by dysbiotic microbiota in the intestine, causing joint 
inflammation. Dysbiosis is an environmental factor that triggers arthritis 
development in genetically susceptible mice.
