Epidemiological studies have linked periodontitis to rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 
Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg) was reported recently to produce citrullinated 
protein (CP) and increase anti-cyclic CP antibody (ACPA), both of which have 
been identified as causative factors of RA. In the present study, we determined 
the effects of Pg infection on the exacerbation of RA in a mouse model. RA model 
mice (SKG mice) were established by an intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 
laminarin (LA). Mice were divided into six groups, Ctrl (PBS injection), LA (LA 
injection), Pg/LA (Pg + LA injection), Pg (Pg injection), Ec/LA (Escherichia 
coli and LA injection) and Ec (E. coli injection). In order to evaluate RA, 
joint swelling by the arthritis score, bone morphology by microcomputed 
tomography (microCT), haematoxylin and eosin staining, ACPA, matrix 
metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) and cytokine level in serum by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay were determined. Osteoclast differentiation from bone marrow 
mononuclear cells (BMCs) was examined to clarify the underlying mechanisms of 
RA. The presence of Pg and CP in joint tissue was also investigated. The 
arthritis score was threefold higher in the Pg/LA group than in the LA group. 
Severe bone destruction was observed in joint tissue of the Pg/LA group. A 
microCT analysis of the Pg/LA group revealed a decrease in bone density. ACPA, 
MMP-3, interleukin (IL)-2, IL-6, CXCL1 and macrophage inflammatory protein 
(MIP)-1α levels from the Pg/LA group were the highest. The osteoclastogenesis of 
BMCs was enhanced in the Pg/LA group. Furthermore, large amounts of Pg 
components and CP were detected in the Pg/LA group. In conclusion, Pg infection 
has the potential to exacerbate RA.
