Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic autoimmune disorder resulting in synovial 
inflammation. Fibroblast activation protein (FAP) is overexpressed by 
fibroblastlike synoviocytes in arthritic joints. Radioimmunoimaging with an 
anti-FAP antibody might be used to monitor the response to therapy, thus 
enabling tailored therapy strategies and therapeutic outcomes. The aim of this 
study was to assess whether a radiolabeled anti-FAP antibody could be used to 
monitor the efficacy of treatment with long-circulating liposomes (LCL) 
containing prednisolone phosphate (PLP-LCL) in a mouse model of arthritis.
METHODS: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) was induced in male DBA/1J mice. Mice 
were treated with a single injection (10 mg/kg) of PLP-LCL or empty LCL as a 
control. SPECT and CT images were acquired 24 h after injection of 99mTc-labeled 
succinimidyl-hydrazinonicotinamide (99mTc-S-HYNIC)-conjugated anti-FAP antibody 
28H1 at 2, 5, and 9 d after treatment. The uptake of 99mTc-S-HYNIC-28H1 in all 
joints was quantified and correlated with macroscopic arthritis scores.
RESULTS: Treatment of CIA with PLP-LCL significantly suppressed joint swelling. 
At just 1 d after treatment, the macroscopic arthritis scores had decreased by 
50%. Scores decreased further, to only 10% of the initial scores, at 5 and 9 d 
after treatment. In contrast, macroscopic arthritis scores had increased up to 
600% in untreated mice at 9 d after the injection of empty LCL. 
99mTc-S-HYNIC-28H1 uptake ranged from 1.5 percentage injected dose per gram in 
noninflamed joints to 22.6 percentage injected dose per gram in severely 
inflamed joints. The uptake of radiolabeled 28H1 in inflamed joints (percentage 
injected dose) correlated with the arthritis score (Spearman œÅ, 0.77; P < 
0.0001). Moreover, the uptake of 99mTc-S-HYNIC-28H1 was slightly increased at 9 
d after therapy but was not seen macroscopically, indicating that SPECT/CT 
imaging might be more sensitive than the macroscopic arthritis scoring method.
CONCLUSION: SPECT/CT imaging with 99mTc-S-HYNIC-28H1 specifically monitored the 
response to therapy, and tracer accumulation correlated with the severity of 
inflammation. In addition, SPECT/CT imaging was potentially more sensitive than 
the macroscopic arthritis scoring method. This study showed that SPECT/CT with 
99mTc-S-HYNIC-28H1 could be used to noninvasively monitor the course of CIA in 
mice.
