In this MiniReview, we summarize the body of knowledge on the delayed-type 
hypersensitivity arthritis (DTHA) model, a recently developed arthritis model 
with 100% incidence, low variation and synchronized onset in C57BL/6 (B6) mice, 
and compare it to other murine arthritis models. It is desirable to have robust 
arthritis models in B6 mice, as many transgene strains are bred on this 
background. However, several of the most widely used mouse model of arthritis 
cannot be induced in B6 mice without the drawback of lower incidence, reduced 
severity and higher variation, if at all. DTHA is induced by modifying a 
classical methylated bovine serum albumin (mBSA)-induced DTH response by 
administering a cocktail of anti-type II collagen antibodies (anti-CII) between 
immunization and challenge. Arthritis affects one, predefined paw in which acute 
inflammation and severe arthritis rapidly develop and peak after 4-7 days. 
Disease is self-resolving over the course of around 3 weeks. Disease 
manifestations resemble those seen in other arthritis models and include bone 
erosion, cartilage destruction, oedema, pannus and new bone formation. Induction 
of DTHA is dependent on CD4+ T cells while B cells are dispensable. The DTHA 
model is set apart from other murine arthritis models in that it can be induced 
in B6 mice with 100% incidence and with high and consistent severity. This is 
the clearest advantage of the model, as the mechanisms of disease and clinical 
manifestations can be found in other arthritis models. The model holds potential 
for future modifications that may improve the lack of chronicity.

Â© 2016 Nordic Association for the Publication of BCPT (former Nordic 
Pharmacological Society).
