CONTEXT: Calophyllum inophyllum Linn. (Clusiaceae) (CI) is traditionally used to 
treat pain, inflammation, eye disorders and rheumatism.
OBJECTIVE: The present study evaluates the antiarthritic activity of the ethanol 
extract of the stem bark (ESBCI) and seeds (ESCI) of Calophyllum inophyllum in 
Freund's adjuvant induced arthritic Wistar albino rat model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: ESBCI and ESCI were screened for in vitro 
anti-inflammatory activity by proteinase inhibition and membrane stabilization 
assays. Acute oral toxicity studies were conducted according to OECD-425 
guidelines. Antiarthritic activity of ESBCI and ESCI at the dose of 
250 mg/kg/p.o. was evaluated by Freund's adjuvant induced arthritic rat model.
RESULTS: ESBCI and ESCI have shown maximum inhibition at 250 μg/mL in proteinase 
inhibition and haemolysis assays. The LD50 of ESBCI and ESCI was found to be 
greater than 5000 and 2000 mg/kg/p.o., respectively. In Freund's adjuvant 
induced arthritic rat model ESBCI, ESCI and Diclofenac treatment have shown 
28.57, 36.36, and 43.51% as maximum reduction in rat paw oedema volume 
respectively when compared with the arthritic control rats. ESBCI and ESCI 
treatment at the dose level of 250 mg/kg/p.o. normalized the altered 
haematological and biochemical parameters of arthritic control rats. 
Histological and radiological evaluation confirmed the antiarthritic effect of 
ESBCI and ESCI.
DISCUSSION: ESBCI and ESCI were found to show significant antiarthritic activity 
evidenced with clinical, biochemical, histological and radiological evaluations.
CONCLUSION: The present study indicates the antiarthritic activity of ESBCI and 
ESCI, however its mechanism of action has to be studied in the future.
