INTRODUCTION: Combination treatment with fingolimod (FTY720) plus pathogenic 
antigen is thought to prevent glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI)325-339-induced 
arthritis progression by effective induction of immune tolerance. Here, we 
examined the efficacy of this combination treatment on remission maintenance.
METHODS: GPI325-339-induced arthritis mice were treated for 5 days with FTY720 
(1.0 mg/kg, p.o.) alone, GPI325-339 (10 μg/mouse, i.v.) alone, or with the 
FTY720 plus GPI325-339 combination. In some experiments, mice were resensitized 
with GPI325-339.
RESULTS: Following resensitization with GPI325-339, combination-treated mice 
exhibited neither severe relapse nor elevated lymphocyte infiltration in joints. 
Neither anti-human nor mouse GPI325-339 antibody levels were correlated with 
clinical symptoms. This suggests that combination treatment prevents relapse 
following resensitization via regulation of pathogenic antigen-specific T cells. 
The proportion of regulatory T (Treg) cells in inguinal lymph nodes was 
increased post treatment in the FTY720 alone and FTY720 plus GPI325-339 groups. 
In contrast, the proportion of glucocorticoid-induced tumor necrosis factor 
receptor-family-related gene/protein (GITR)(+) non-Treg cells was increased only 
in combination-treated mice. Furthermore, GITR(+) non-Treg cells, which were 
induced by the combination treatment in vivo, possess suppressive activity and 
high ability to produce interleukin (IL)-10.
CONCLUSION: GITR(+) non-Treg cells might play a key role in relapse prevention 
following resensitization. Thus, this combination treatment might establish 
immune tolerance by induction of GITR(+) non-Treg cells.
