AIM: Present study was designed to evaluate protective effects of pentoxifylline 
and its potentiation with low dose of nitric oxide (NO) modulators in 
adjuvant-induced experimental arthritis in rats.
METHOD: Wistar rats (200-300 g, n = 8 per group) of both sexes were used in the 
study. On day "0" experimental arthritis was induced by injecting 0.2 ml of 
Complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) in sub-planter region of right hind paw of 
animals. Pentoxifylline treatment alone and in combination with NO modulators 
was given (i.p.) from day 14 to 28. Various arthritic parameters were recorded 
and blood and joint synovial fluid was collected for biochemical analysis.
RESULTS: CFA inoculation significantly increases (1) arthritic index (2) ankle 
diameter (3) paw volume (4) histopathology score (5) serum TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β 
and synovial TNF-α levels (p < 0.001) (6) serum Th1 and Th2 cytokine levels g) 
MDA levels in rat paw tissue homogenates (7) serum NF-κB levels. Significant 
decrease in serum IL-10 levels and SOD activity was observed in rats after CFA 
inoculation. Decrease in body weight and suppressed general quality of life of 
CFA inoculated rats was also observed. These CFA-induced arthritic changes were 
significantly reversed by pentoxifylline alone and in combination with low dose 
of NO modulators (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: These results are suggestive of protective effects of pentoxifylline 
and its potentiation in combination with low dose of NO modulators. These 
results may provide new pharmacological therapy for management of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA).
