INTRODUCTION: Insulin like growth factor (IGF)-I can act on a variety of cells 
involved in cartilage and bone repair, yet IGF-I has not been studied 
extensively in the context of inflammatory arthritis. The objective of this 
study was to investigate whether IGF-I overexpression in the osteoblast lineage 
could lead to increased reparative or pathological bone formation in rheumatoid 
arthritis and/or spondyloarthritis respectively.
METHODS: Mice overexpressing IGF-I in the osteoblast lineage (Ob-IGF-I+/-) line 
324-7 were studied during collagen induced arthritis and in the DBA/1 aging 
model for ankylosing enthesitis. Mice were scored clinically and peripheral 
joints were analysed histologically for the presence of hypertrophic 
chondrocytes and osteocalcin positive osteoblasts.
RESULTS: 90-100% of the mice developed CIA with no differences between the 
Ob-IGF-I+/- and non-transgenic littermates. Histological analysis revealed 
similar levels of hypertrophic chondrocytes and osteocalcin positive osteoblasts 
in the ankle joints. In the DBA/1 aging model for ankylosing enthesitis 60% of 
the mice in both groups had a clinical score 1<. Severity was similar between 
both groups. Histological analysis revealed the presence of hypertrophic 
chondrocytes and osteocalcin positive osteoblasts in the toes in equal levels.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of IGF-I in the osteoblast lineage does not 
contribute to an increase in repair of erosions or syndesmophyte formation in 
mouse models for destructive and remodeling arthritis.
