Tofacitinib is an oral Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor for the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis. Tofacitinib preferentially inhibits receptor signaling 
through JAK3 and JAK1, relative to JAK2. In the 2-year rat carcinogenicity 
study, there were tofacitinib, dose-related increases in the incidences of 
testicular Leydig cell hyperplasia and benign adenomas in male rats, and 
decreased incidences of mammary tumors and duct dilatation/galactocele in female 
rats. Such findings in rats are typical of agents, such as dopamine agonists, 
which decrease prolactin (PRL) activity. Since prolactin signals through the 
JAK2 pathway, we hypothesized that these findings were off-target effects due to 
inhibition of PRL signaling via JAK2. The studies reported here were designed to 
investigate the interruption of PRL signaling pathways in Leydig cells. In 
isolated primary rat Leydig cells, PRL increased phosphorylated Signal 
Transducer and Activator of Transcription-5 protein, and mRNA levels for 
luteinizing hormone receptor. Tofacitinib, at concentrations observed in the rat 
carcinogenicity study, dose-dependently inhibited these effects. These 
observations illustrate a novel mechanism, the inhibition of prolactin signaling 
by which modulation of JAK activity can modulate PRL signaling pathways to 
induce Leydig cell tumors in rats. Since human Leydig cells lack this PRL 
dependence for normal function, these rodent tumors do not indicate a health 
risk to human patients.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.
