Bone lytic diseases including osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and bone 
metastatic tumors affect hundreds of millions people worldwide. Targeting 
over-activated osteoclasts as an anti-resorptive treatment becomes an important 
strategy to treat osteolytic diseases. Artesunate is a compound derived from 
artemisinin (qinghaosu) and has been used to treat malaria and rheumatoid 
arthritis clinically in China, but its role in osteolysis is unknown. Here, we 
found that artesunate could suppress RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and bone 
resorption from 1.56 to 12.5μM. Artesunate obviously reduced RANKL-induced 
NF-κB-luc activity at 50μM, but had no effects on RANKL-induced NF-κB activation 
(NF-κB luciferase activity, IκB-α degradation and nuclear NF-κB p65 protein 
level) from 3.125 to 12.5μM in pre-osteoclastic RAW264.7 cells. Interestingly, 
artesunate could significantly inhibit RANKL-induced NFATc1 activation measured 
by NFAT luciferase activity, NFATc1 mRNA and nuclear NFATc1 protein levels from 
3.125 to 12.5μM. Further study revealed that artesunate inhibited RANKL 
up-regulated PLCγ1 activation, intracellular calcium, and calcineurin (PP2B-Aα) 
protein expression from 3.125 to 12.5μM. In addition, the NFATc1 targeted 
osteoclast-specific genes expression including cathepsin K, MMP-9, and TRAP was 
reduced by artesunate. Finally, we showed that artesunate was able to reverse 
the bone loss in an ovariectomized mouse model in vivo accompanied with reduced 
RANKL, RANKL/OPG, and TRAP-5b levels. This study indicates that artesunate 
inhibits RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and bone loss by inhibiting 
PLCγ1-Ca2+-calcineurin-NFATc1 pathway. Collectively, our data suggest that 
artesunate is a potential treatment option against RANKL-mediated osteolytic 
bone disease.
