Triptolide, a primary active ingredient extracted from a traditional Chinese 
herb, Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F, has been demonstrated to have a positive 
therapeutic effect on patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA); however, its 
mechanism of action against RA is not well established. Therefore, in the 
present study, we observed the effect of triptolide on the aggressive behavior 
of RA fibroblast-like synoviocytes (RA FLSs), and we explored its underlying 
signal mechanisms. We found that triptolide treatment significantly reduced the 
migratory and invasive capacities of RA FLSs in vitro. We also demonstrated that 
the invasion of RA FLSs into the cartilage, evaluated in the severe combined 
immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse co-implantation model, was attenuated by treatment 
with triptolide in vivo. Additionally, the immunofluorescence results showed 
that triptolide treatment decreased the polymerization of F-actin and the 
activation of matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9). To gain insight into the 
molecular signal mechanisms, we determined the effect of triptolide on the 
activation of MAPK signal pathways. Our results indicate that triptolide 
treatment reduced the TNF-Î±-induced expression of phosphorylated JNK, but did 
not affect the expression of phosphorylated p38 and ERK. A JNK-specific 
inhibitor decreased the migration of RA FLSs. We also observed that triptolide 
administration improved clinical arthritic conditions and joint destruction in 
mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). Thus, our findings suggest that the 
therapeutic effects of triptolide on RA might be, in part, due to its 
contribution to the aggressive behavior of RA FLSs.
