The advent of sophisticated diagnostics has enabled the discovery of previously 
unknown arthropod-borne viruses like Chikungunya. This infection has become 
increasingly prevalent in the last 10 years across the Indian Ocean and has been 
brought to media attention by a recent outbreak in the Caribbean. The outbreak 
has been aided by a drastic rise in air travel, allowing infected individuals to 
transport the virus to previously unaffected regions. In addition, a recently 
documented viral mutation has allowed its transmission by the Aedes albopictus 
mosquito, therefore facilitating outbreaks in Southern Europe and the USA. The 
duration and extent of the arthritis seen peri- and post infection has become a 
topic of academic interest. Although published data are largely observational, 
there has been a definite increase in original research focusing on this. 
Symptoms can persist for years, particularly in older patients with pre-existing 
medical conditions. The etiology is still not fully understood, but viral 
persistence and immune activation within synovial fluid have been shown in mouse 
models. There have been no prospective clinical trials of treatment in humans; 
however, animal trials are in process. The mainstay of treatment remains 
anti-inflammatories and steroids where necessary. The clinical presentation 
seems to mimic common rheumatological conditions like rheumatoid arthritis; 
therefore recent recommendations suggest the use disease-modifying agents as a 
common practice for the specific syndrome. This review uses recent published 
data and draws on our own clinical experience to provide an overview of joint 
complications of Chikungunya infection.
