Boesenbergia rotunda (L.) Mansf. had been traditionally used as herbs to treat 
pain and rheumatism. Cardamonin (2',4'-dihydroxy-6'-methoxychalcone) is a 
compound isolated from Boesenbergia rotunda (L.) Mansf.. Previous study had 
shown the potential of cardamonin in inhibiting the release of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) in vitro. Thus, the possible therapeutic effect of 
cardamonin in the rheumatoid arthritis (RA) joints is postulated. This study was 
performed to investigate the anti-arthritic properties of cardamonin in rat 
model of induced RA, particularly on the inflammatory and pain response of RA. 
Rheumatoid arthritis paw inflammation was induced by intraplantar (i.pl.) 
injection of complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) in Sprague Dawley rats. Using four 
doses of cardamonin (0.625, 1.25, 2.5, and 5.0mg/kg), anti-arthritic activity 
was evaluated through the paw edema, mechanical allodynia and thermal 
hyperalgesia responses. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was carried 
out to evaluate the plasma level of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6. Histological slides 
were prepared from the harvested rat paws to observe the arthritic changes in 
the joints. Behavioral, biochemical, and histological studies showed that 
cardamonin demonstrated significant inhibition on RA-induced inflammatory and 
pain responses as well as progression of joint destruction in rats. ELISA 
results showed that there was significant inhibition in TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 
levels in plasma of the cardamonin-treated RA rats. Overall, cardamonin 
possesses potential anti-arthritic properties in CFA-induced RA rat model.
