Guanjiekang (GJK) that is formed by five medicinal herbs including Astragali 
Radix, Aconiti Lateralis Radix Praeparaia, Glycyrrhizae Radix et Rhizoma, 
Corydalis Rhizoma and Paeoniae Radix Alba was used for the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, the pharmacokinetic (PK) profile of active 
components in GJK remains unclear. This study aims to evaluate the 
pharmacokinetic behavior of seven representative active constituents in GJK 
(i.e., benzoylhypaconine, benzoylmesaconine, paeoniflorin, tetrahydropalmatine, 
calycosin-7-glucoside, formononetin and isoliquiritigenin) after oral 
administration of GJK in rats. A rapid, sensitive and reliable ultra-performance 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometer (UPLC-MS/MS) method has been 
successfully developed for the simultaneous determination of these seven 
constituents in rat plasma. Chromatographic separation was achieved on a C18 
column with a gradient elution program that consists of acetonitrile and water 
(containing 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 0.35 mL/min. Detection was 
performed under the multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) in the positive 
electrospray ionization (ESI) mode. The calibration curves exhibited good 
linearity (RÂ² > 0.99) over a wide concentration range for all constituents. The 
accuracies ranged from 92.9% to 107.8%, and the intra-day and inter-day 
precisions at three different levels were below 15%. Our PK results showed that 
these seven compounds were quickly absorbed after the administration of the GJK 
product, and Tmax ranged from 30 min to 189 min. The in vivo concentrations of 
paeoniflorin and isoliquiritigenin were significantly higher than the reported 
in vitro effective doses, indicating that they could partly contribute to the 
therapeutic effect of GJK. Therefore, we conclude that pharmacokinetic studies 
of representative bioactive chemicals after administration of complex herbal 
products are not only necessary but also feasible. Moreover, these seven 
compounds that were absorbed in vivo can be used as indicator standards for 
quality control and for determining pharmacokinetic behavior of herbal medicines 
in clinical studies.
