Recent studies have indicated a potential correlation between rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and periodontal inflammation. We undertook this study to verify 
whether RA mediates periodontitis-like phenotypes in experimental mouse models 
of RA and to explore the role of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT) 
in periodontal inflammation during RA pathogenesis. Periodontal inflammation and 
alveolar bone loss have been reported in mice with collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) and in genetically modified tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) transgenic 
(TG) mouse models. Among the adipokines examined in our study, NAMPT expression 
was markedly upregulated in the periodontal ligament (PDL) tissues in RA mouse 
models and in human PDL cells stimulated by the proinflammatory cytokines, 
interleukin (IL) 1β and TNF-α. When NAMPT was overexpressed with the 
Nampt-synthesizing adenovirus vector (Ad- Nampt), the PDL cells exhibited an 
increased expression of cytokines (IL6), chemokines (IL8 and chemokine [C-C 
motif] ligand 5 [CCL5]), inflammatory mediators (cyclooxygenase 2 [COX-2]), and 
matrix-degrading enzymes (matrix metalloproteinase [MMP] 1 and MMP3). Inhibition 
of NAMPT by the intracellular NAMPT (iNAMPT) inhibitor, FK866, or by the sirtuin 
inhibitor, nicotinamide, in PDL cells led to inhibition of the IL1β or Ad- 
Nampt-induced upregulation of catabolic factors, whereas treatment with 
recombinant NAMPT protein or blockade of extracellular NAMPT (eNAMPT) with 
blocking antibody did not. Moreover, NAMPT inhibition by the intraperitoneal or 
intragingival injection of FK866 in CIA mice inhibited periodontal tissue 
damage, under conditions of RA. Thus, our results verified the co-occurrence of 
RA and periodontal inflammation using experimental mouse models of RA, 
suggesting that iNAMPT in PDL cells plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of 
RA-mediated periodontal inflammation by regulating the expression levels of 
catabolic genes, such as IL6, IL8, CCL5, COX-2, MMP1, and MMP3.
