BACKGROUND: Leflunomide is a low-molecular-weight compound that is widely used 
in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Although leflunomide is thought to act 
through the inhibition of the de novo pyrimidine synthesis, the molecular 
mechanism of the drug remains largely unknown. We investigated the antiarthritis 
effects and mechanisms of action of the active metabolite of leflunomide, A77 
1726, in interleukin-1 receptor antagonist-knockout (IL-1Ra-KO) mice.
METHODS: 14- to 15-week-old male IL-1Ra-KO mice were treated with 10 or 30 mg/kg 
A77 1726 via intraperitoneal injection three times per week for 6 weeks. The 
effects of A77 1726 on arthritis severities were assessed by clinical scoring 
and histological analysis. The serum concentrations of IL-1β, tumor necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α), and malondialdehyde were measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. Histologic analysis of the joints was performed using 
Safranin O, and immunohistochemical staining. The frequencies of 
interleukin-17-producing CD4+ T (Th17) cells were analyzed by flow cytometry. 
Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression in splenic CD4+ T cells isolated from A77 
1726-treated arthritis mice were assessed by western blotting.
RESULTS: A77 1726 treatment induced heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) in Jurkat cells and 
primary mouse T cells. Interestingly, A77 1726 inhibited Th17 cell 
differentiation. In vivo, A77 1726 reduced the clinical arthritis severity of 
histological inflammation and cartilage destruction. The joints isolated from 
A77 1726-treated mice showed decreased expression of inducible nitric oxide 
synthase, nitrotyrosine, TNF-α, and IL-1β. The serum levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and 
malondialdehyde were also decreased in A77 1726-treated mice. Whereas the number 
of Th17 cells in spleens was decreased in A77 1726-treated arthritis mice, a 
significant increase in the number of Treg cells in spleens was observed. 
Interestingly, HO-1 expression was significantly higher in splenic CD4+ T cells 
isolated from A77 1726-treated mice compared with those from vehicle-treated 
mice, whereas HO-1 expression of splenic non-CD4+ T cells did not differ between 
groups.
CONCLUSION: The inhibitory effects of A77 1726 on joint inflammation and 
oxidative stress in autoimmune arthritis may be associated with HO-1 induction 
in CD4+ T cells.
