BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Abnormal glycolytic metabolism contributes to joint 
inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aims of this study were to 
investigate the role of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase 3 
(PFKFB3), a bifunctional enzyme that controls the glycolytic rate, in regulating 
fibroblast-like synoviocyte (FLS)-mediated synovial inflammation and 
invasiveness in RA.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: A specific inhibitor of PFKFB3, PFK15, and siRNA were 
used to evaluate the role of PFKFB3. Protein expression was measured by Western 
blotting or immunofluorescence staining. The expression of cytokines was 
determined by quantitative real-time PCR. Migration and invasion were measured 
using a Boyden chamber assay. A mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
was used to evaluate the in vivo effect of PFK15.
KEY RESULTS: PFKFB3 expression was increased in the synovial tissue and FLSs 
from RA patients compared with osteoarthritis patients. PFKFB3 inhibition 
decreased the expression of IL-8, IL-6, CCL-2 and CXCL-10 and the proliferation, 
migration and invasion of RA FLSs. PFK15 suppressed TNF-α-induced activation of 
NF-κB and p38, JNK and ERK MAPK signals in RA FLSs. PFK15 treatment also 
suppressed glucose uptake and lactate secretion. Lactate reversed the inhibitory 
effect of PFK15 or PFKFB3 siRNA on cytokine expression and migration of RA FLSs. 
Lactate was also involved in PFKFB3-mediated activation of NF-κB and MAPKs. 
Intraperitoneal injection of PFK15 in mice with CIA attenuated joint 
inflammation.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: Elevated PFKFB3 expression might contribute to 
synovial inflammation and aggressive behaviours of RA FLSs, suggesting a novel 
strategy of targeting PFKFB3 to prevent synovial inflammation and joint 
destruction in RA.
