Naproxen (NPX) is used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) for 
alleviation of pain and inflammation. In view of the extensive albumin binding 
of NPX, this study investigates whether chronic inflammation and sex influence 
the physiologic albumin concentrations, plasma protein binding, and 
pharmacokinetics (PK) of NPX. The PK of NPX was evaluated in a rat model of RA 
[collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in Lewis rats] and in healthy controls. These 
PK studies included 1) NPX in female and male CIA rats that received 10, 25, or 
50 mg/kg NPX i.p.; and 2) NPX in healthy female and male rats after i.p. dosing 
of NPX at 50 mg/kg. Plasma albumin concentrations were quantified by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and protein binding was assessed using 
ultrafiltration. The NPX concentrations in plasma and filtrates were determined 
by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Plasma 
concentration-time data of NPX were first assessed by noncompartmental analysis 
(NCA). Nonlinear PK as indicated by dose-dependent NCA clearances and 
distribution volumes was observed. A two-compartment model with a first-order 
absorption process incorporating nonlinear protein binding in plasma and tissues 
jointly described the PK data of all groups. Saturable albumin binding accounts 
for the nonlinearity of NPX PK in all rats as well as part of the PK differences 
in arthritic rats. The CIA rats exhibited reduced albumin concentrations, 
reduced overall protein binding, and reduced clearances of unbound NPX, 
consistent with expectations during inflammation. The net effect of chronic 
inflammation was an elevation of the Cmax and area under the plasma 
concentration-time curve (AUC) of unbound drug.

Copyright Â© 2017 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.
