BACKGROUND: The dysfunction of articular chondrocytes is a crucial step in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) pathogenesis while its molecular mechanisms are not 
fully known. This study was aimed to investigate the expression of aquaporin 4 
(AQP4) in articular chondrocytes of adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rats and 
its involvement in AIA development.
METHODS: Thirty rats were divided into normal and AIA group (n = 15). Rat AIA 
was induced by intradermal injection of complete Freund's adjuvant and evaluated 
by secondary paw swelling and histological assessments on knee joint damage. 
Localization and protein expression of AQP4 in articular cartilage were examined 
by immunohistochemistry and western blot. In vitro study, AIA articular 
chondrocytes were cultured and treated with acetazolamide, an AQPs inhibitor. 
AQP4 protein level, cell proliferation and mRNA levels of type-II collagen 
(COII) and aggrecan were measured by western blot, MTT assay and real-time PCR, 
respectively.
RESULTS: The results of immunohistochemistry and western blot indicated that 
AQP4 showed higher protein levels in cartilage tissues of AIA rats than that of 
normal rats. Correlation analysis revealed that AQP4 protein level in cartilage 
tissues of AIA rats remarkably correlated positively with secondary paw swelling 
on day 26 after AIA induction as well as pathological scores on joint damage. 
Additionally, acetazolamide treatment effectively decreased AQP4 protein level, 
increased cell proliferation and mRNA levels of COII and aggrecan, suggesting 
AQP4 inhibition by acetazolamide could normalize the dysfunction of AIA 
articular chondrocytes in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide certain experimental evidence that AQP4 
over-expression in articular chondrocytes aggravated AIA severity and might be a 
novel target for RA treatment.
