AIM: To develop a colon-targeting bioreversible delivery system for Î²-boswellic 
acid (BBA) and explore utility of its prodrugs in 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic 
acid (TNBS)-induced colitis in rats.
METHODS: Synthesis of 4 co-drugs of BBA with essential amino acids was achieved 
by CDI coupling, followed by their spectral characterization. In vitro kinetics 
were studied by HPLC in aqueous buffers, homogenates of gastrointestinal tract 
and fecal matter. In vivo kinetic studies were performed in Wistar rat plasma, 
urine and feces. The prodrugs were screened in TNBS-induced colitis modeled 
Wistar rats. Statistical significance was assumed at P < 0.05, P < 0.01, P < 
0.001 when compared with disease controls using one-way and two-way ANOVAs.
RESULTS: Prodrugs were stable in 0.05 mol/L HCl buffer (pH 1.2) and stomach 
homogenates. Negligible hydrolysis was observed in phosphate buffer and 
intestinal homogenates. Substantial release (55%-72% and 68%-86%) of BBA was 
achieved in rat fecal matter and homogenates of colon. In vivo studies of BBA 
with L-tryptophan (BT) authenticated colon-specific release of BBA. But, 
surprisingly substantial concentration of BBA was seen to reach the systemic 
circulation due to probable absorption through colonic mucosa. Site-specifically 
enhanced bioavailability of BBA could be achieved in colon, which resulted in 
demonstration of significant mitigating effect on TNBS-induced colitis in rats 
without inducing any adverse effects on stomach, liver and pancreas. Prodrug of 
BT was found to be 1.7% (P < 0.001) superior than sulfasalazine in reducing the 
inflammation to colon among all prodrugs tested.
CONCLUSION: The outcome of this study strongly suggests that these prodrugs 
might have dual applicability to inflammatory bowel disease and chronotherapy of 
rheumatoid arthritis.
