The objective of the present study is to evaluate the inhibitory effects of 
taxol (PTX) on angiogenesis in a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model. 
Collagen II (C II) and complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) were used in C57BL/6 
(H-2b) mice to generate the CIA model. Random grouping was performed in the 
normal control group, CIA model group, PTX 1.5 mg/kg group, PTX 1.0 mg/kg group, 
and PTX 0.5 mg/kg group. Arthritis index scores, tissue pathology scores, and 
synovium microvessel density (MVD) analysis were performed. Immunohistochemistry 
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay were used to detect the expression of 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and hypoxia-inducible factor-α 
(HIF-1α). The correlation between MVD and pathological scores and between MVD 
and the expression of VEGF as well as HIF-1α in the synovium were also 
evaluated. After PTX treatment, the three intervention group arthritis index 
scores were reduced when compared with the CIA group. The total histological 
scores in the three PTX treatment groups were lower than those in the CIA group. 
Similarly, PTX significantly alleviated the scores for synovitis, pannus 
formation, and bone destruction. Compared with the CIA group, the MVD of the 
three intervention groups decreased in a dose-dependent manner. The expression 
of VEGF and HIF-1α in synovial tissues and serum also significantly decreased 
after PTX treatment. Further analysis showed that MVD and pathological scores 
and MVD and expression of VEGF as well as HIF-1α in the synovium were positively 
correlated. PTX may alleviate CIA by suppressing angiogenesis, providing new 
insights into the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). VEGF and HIF-1α may be 
targets for PTX suppression of microvessel formation.
