The KH type splicing regulatory protein (KSRP) is a nucleic acid binding 
protein, which negatively regulates the stability and/or translatability of many 
mRNA species encoding immune-relevant proteins. As KSRP is expressed in immune 
cells including T and B cells, neutrophils, macrophages and dendritic cells, we 
wanted to analyze its importance for the development of autoimmune diseases. We 
chose collagen antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA) as an appropriate autoimmune 
disease mouse model in which neutrophils and macrophages constitute the main 
effector cell populations. We compared arthritis induction in wild type (WT) and 
KSRP-/- mice and paws were taken for histological sections and qPCR analysis. 
Furthermore, we determined the frequencies of spleen immune cells by flow 
cytometry. Cytokine levels in spleen cell supernatants were determined by 
cytometric bead array analyses (CBA). After CAIA induction we unexpectedly 
observed in WT animals much stronger swelling of the paws than in KSRP-/- mice. 
In accordance, histological staining of paw sections of KSRP-/- animals revealed 
much lower frequencies of infiltrating immune cells in the joints compared to WT 
animals. Furthermore, CAIA-treatment resulted in reduced expression of several 
inflammatory factors (like CXCL-1, iNOS, TNF-α and S100A8) as well as immune 
cell marker genes (e.g. LFA-1, CD68, Ly6G) in the joints of KSRP-/- mice. Spleen 
cells of KSRP-/- mice showed lower frequencies of myeloid cells. On cytokine 
level IFN-γ production was increased in spleen cells of KSRP-/- mice compared to 
WT samples. These data surprisingly suggest that the absence of KSRP protects 
against the induction of inflammatory arthritis.
