BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Mounting studies have illustrated an important role of 
autophagy in various diseases, but few studies have reported its contribution to 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and the underlying mechanism was largely unknown. This 
study aimed to investigate whether autophagy inhibitors could regulate apoptosis 
and proliferation through PI3K/AKT pathway in RA.
METHODS: RA animal model was established by collagen induction. General 
observations and degree of joint swelling were observed. Inflammatory response, 
cell survival related factors and apoptosis were also detected in synovial 
fibroblasts. In addition, cultured rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (RA-FLS) were subjected to TNF-α treatment in vitro, and TNF-α 
induced cell autophagy, synovial cell proliferation and apoptosis were detected. 
Moreover, cell cycle and cytokine secretion protein, along with the above 
parameters, were analyzed.
RESULTS: Results from the animal model showed that autophagy inhibitors 
attenuated inflammatory reaction and synovial hyperplasia, while promoted 
synovial fibroblasts apoptosis. Meanwhile, inhibition of autophagy promoted cell 
apoptosis and reversed cell proliferation in vitro, also blocked cell in the 
G2/M arrest and reduced the S phase cells. Furthermore, we observed that 
inhibition of PI3K/AKT pathway reversed TNF-α mediated autophagy and cytokine 
secretion.
CONCLUSION: autophagy inhibitors could mitigate inflammation response, 
inhibiting RA-FLS cell proliferation while promoting cell apoptosis by the 
PI3K/AKT pathway.
