BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a symmetric inflammatory polyarthritis 
associated with high concentrations of pro-inflammatory, cytokines including 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. Adalimumab is a monoclonal antibody (mAb) that 
binds TNF-α, and is widely used to treat RA. Despite its proven clinical 
efficacy, adalimumab and other therapeutic mAbs have disadvantages, including 
the requirement for repeated bolus injections and the appearance of treatment 
limiting anti-drug antibodies. To address these issues, we have developed an 
innovative ex vivo gene therapy approach, termed transduced autologous 
restorative gene therapy (TARGT), to produce and secrete adalimumab for the 
treatment of RA.
METHODS: Helper-dependent (HD) adenovirus vector containing adalimumab light and 
heavy chain coding sequences was used to transduce microdermal tissues and cells 
of human and mouse origin ex vivo, rendering sustained secretion of active 
adalimumab. The genetically engineered tissues were subsequently implanted in a 
mouse model of RA.
RESULTS: Transduced human microdermal tissues implanted in SCID mice 
demonstrated 49 days of secretion of active adalimumab in the blood, at levels 
of tens of microgram per milliliter. In addition, transduced autologous dermal 
cells were implanted in the RA mouse model and demonstrated statistically 
significant amelioration in RA symptoms compared to naïve cell implantation and 
were similar to recombinant adalimumab bolus injections.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study report microdermal tissues 
engineered to secrete active adalimumab as a proof of concept for sustained 
secretion of antibody from the novel ex vivo gene therapy TARGT platform. This 
technology may now be applied to a range of antibodies for the therapy of other 
diseases.
