Dipeptidyl peptidase I (DPPI), a lysosomal cysteine protease, required for 
activation of serine proteases of granulocytes including mast cells (MCs), 
neutrophils (NPs) and others, which were found in synovial tissue of patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). But, the role of DPPI associated with those 
cells in RA development is unclear. In this study, the 
collagen-induced-arthritis (CIA) rat-model was employed to investigate the 
expression and activity levels of DPPI and its association with RA progress. 
Primary granulocytes were freshly extracted from bone-marrows of normal or CIA 
rats, human mast cell line LAD-2 and primary neutrophils, 
human-recombinant-DPPI, DPPI-inhibitor Gly-Phe-CHN2 , LTB4, anti-IgE antibody, 
calcium ionophore were used to study the regulatory role of DPPI in cell 
activations. The increased DPPI activities in synovial fluids, serum, and 
bone-marrow homogenates of CIA rats associated with RA severities progress were 
observed after injections. MMP2/9 expressions in SFs and bone-marrow were in 
different patterns. Regular-Blood-Tests have shown the high leveled DPPI 
activities associated with granulocytes differentiations in-vivo in blood of CIA 
rats. In-vitro cell models, DPPI up-regulated the proliferation of primary 
bone-marrow granulocytes of normal rats, but inhibited that of CIA rats. DPPI 
up-regulated and Gly-Phe-CHN2 down-regulated MCs intracellular DPPI and chymase 
activities. Gly-Phe-CHN2 also inhibited the LTB4 -activated-NPs and NP-elastase 
activities. Following stimulation of calcium ionophore, the net-releases of DPPI 
and Î²-hexosaminidase from MCs were increased over a time-course, while 
Gly-Phe-CHN2 down-regulated MCs and NPs activation. Our findings demonstrate the 
role of DPPI in regulating MCs and NPs activation, and modulating proteolysis in 
the process of RA.
