Nyctanthes arbor-tristis (NAT) is commonly used traditionally for the treatment 
of rheumatism and inflammatory diseases. Current study evaluates the 
antiarthritic potential of NAT using Freund's adjuvant-induced arthritic rat 
model. Treatments with methanolic, ethyl acetate, and n-hexane extracts were 
continued for consecutive 20 days. Macroscopic arthritic scoring and water 
displacement plethysmometry were used to evaluate arthritic development. 
Hematological and biochemical parameters were investigated and ankle joints were 
processed for histopathological evaluation. Qualitative phytochemical analysis 
and GC-MS analysis were conducted for identification of constituents. NAT 
extracts suppressed arthritic scoring, paw edema, infiltration of inflammatory 
cells, pannus formation, and bone erosion. The plant extracts ameliorated total 
leukocytes and platelet counts and nearly normalized red blood cells (RBC) 
counts and hemoglobin (Hb) content. The extracts were found safe in terms of 
hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity as determined by aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), creatinine, and urea levels. Comparative 
analysis showed that ethyl acetate extract produced the highest inhibition of 
paw edema. The major constituents found in ethyl acetate extract can be 
classified into three major classes, that is, terpenes, terpenoids, fatty acids, 
and iridoid glycosides. Current study showed that Nyctanthes arbor-tristis 
ameliorated experimental rheumatoid arthritis and ethyl acetate extract 
possessed the highest inhibitory activity.
