Tacrolimus is an immunosuppressive drug that inhibits the release of 
inflammatory cytokines involved in rheumatoid arthritis development by blocking 
T cell activation. "Endoplasmic reticulum stress," an imbalance between protein 
folding load and capacity leading to the accumulation of unfolded proteins in 
the endoplasmic reticulum lumen, has been implicated in rheumatoid arthritis and 
other inflammatory and metabolic diseases. We aimed to investigate the effect of 
tacrolimus on endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated osteoclastogenesis and 
inflammation and elucidate the underlying mechanisms. In vitro studies were 
performed using mouse bone marrow cells that were cultured with or without 
interleukin-1β, thapsigargin, or tacrolimus to induce osteoclast 
differentiation. A mouse model of arthritis was established by immunizing mice 
with bovine type II collagen. Tacrolimus was orally administered to mice from 
day 20 to 45 following the initial immunization, and histopathological changes 
and expression of specific biomarkers of endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated 
inflammatory signaling pathways were examined. In vitro, tacrolimus inhibited 
receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand-mediated osteoclast formation 
augmented by interleukin-1β, thapsigargin, or both. Furthermore, tacrolimus 
inhibited glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), protein kinase R-like endoplasmic 
reticulum kinase, inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE 1), and activating 
transcription factor 6 (ATF6) augmented by interleukin-1β, thapsigargin, or 
both. Tacrolimus significantly ameliorated osteolysis and endoplasmic reticulum 
stress intensity in mice. Simultaneously, it reduced inflammatory cell 
infiltration, osteoclastogenesis, and inflammatory responses by inhibiting 
GRP78, IRE 1, and ATF6. These findings suggest that tacrolimus exhibits an 
anti-inflammation effect in rheumatoid arthritis and might inhibit joint damage 
progression by inhibiting endoplasmic reticulum stress.
