Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by an 
elevated synovial inflammatory response, with destruction or erosion of 
articular cartilage in major joints. The aim of the present study was to examine 
whether 20‑hydroxyecdysone (HES) is able to ameliorate oxidative stress and 
inflammatory responses in a collagen‑induced rheumatoid arthritis (CIA) rat 
model. A total of 40 healthy male rats were selected arbitrarily and separated 
into four groups. Rats treated with saline served as a control (group I), rats 
subjected to CIA induction by intradermal injection of bovine collagen II type 
served as the induced group (group II), while rats induced with CIA and 
administered with 10 and 20 mg/kg bodyweight HES for 28 days served as treatment 
groups (groups III and IV). Biochemical parameters, including paw swelling 
(edema), arthritis score, indexes of thymus and spleen, antioxidant levels 
(superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione), articular elastase and 
anti‑collagen II specific immunoglobulins (Ig)G, IgG1 and IgG2a, in addition to 
inflammatory markers [nitric oxide, C‑reactive protein, interleukin (IL)‑1β, 
IL‑6, tumor necrosis factor‑α and nuclear factor‑κB p65 subunit] were 
significantly decreased (P<0.01) following supplementation with HES 
(10/20 mg/kg). Consistently, the protein expression pattern of inducible nitric 
oxide synthase and cyclooxygenease‑2 were significantly downregulated (P<0.01) 
upon treatment with HES. In addition, histological analysis confirmed arthritis 
in CIA‑induced rats by revealing the presence of greater polymorphonuclear cell 
infiltration, with eroded articular cartilage and prominent synovitis. However, 
administration of HES was demonstrated to alleviate the morphological changes 
and maintain the normal architecture of synovial joints. In conclusion, the 
results of the present study indicated that treatment with HES (particularly 
20 mg/kg) may effectively eradicate the inflammatory cascade and oxidative 
stress process in CIA‑induced rats and thereby exhibit anti‑rheumatoid arthritis 
properties.
