The objective of this study was to investigate the effects of leukotriene B4 
(LTB4) on the expression of interleukin-32 (IL-32) interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and 
chemokine monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP-1) and macrophage inhibitory 
protein (MIP-1α) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The rat model of RA collagen 
induced-arthritis (CIA) was established. The levels of LTB4, interleukin-32, 
IFN-γ and chemokines MCP-1 and MIP-1α in CIA rats were detected by ELISA. After 
the rat synovial cells were isolated and treated with different concentrations 
of LTB4, the effect of LTB4 the expression of IL-32, IFN-γ and chemokines MCP-1 
and MIP-1α mRNA in synovial cells was detected by real-time quantitative PCR, 
the effect of LTB4 on protein expression was detected by immunoblotting. The 
effects of different concentrations of LTB4 on the viability and apoptosis of 
synovial cells were detected by LDH and cell proliferation reagent WST-1. 
Compared with the control group, the levels of LTB4, IL-32, IFN-γ and chemokines 
MCP-1 and MIP-1α were significantly increased in the serum of the CIA group. 
After treatment of CIA rat synovial cells with different concentrations of LTB4, 
the expression of IL-32, IFN-γ and chemokines MCP-1 and MIP-1α mRNA and protein 
were increased with significant differences among groups. WST-1 and flow 
cytometry showed that LTB4 had significant toxic effects on synovial cells and 
promoted apoptosis. In conclusion, LTB4 promotes the expression of 
interleukin-32, IFN-γ and chemokines MCP-1 and MIP-1α in synovial cells and 
facilitates apoptosis of synovial cells.
