Current therapy for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) relies on global suppression of 
the immune response or specific blockade of inflammatory cytokines. However, it 
is unclear how immunosuppressants affect patients with cancer. Therefore, in the 
present study, the effect of three biological agents, tofacitinib, anti-mouse 
IL-6 receptor antibody (MR16-1) and etanercept, which are used for the treatment 
of RA diseases, on a tumor-bearing mouse model was investigated. The effect of 
the three agents was examined using a mouse lung-metastasis model with the 
murine colon 26 cancer cell line. Lymphocyte subsets and natural killer (NK) 
cells in peripheral blood and spleen were analyzed using fluorescence-activated 
cell sorting, and the number of lung surface nodules was examined. In the 
continuous tofacitinib administration (15 mg/kg/day) group, the number of lung 
surface nodules was significantly increased compared with that of the 
vehicle-treated group (vehicle, 1.20±0.58; tofacitinib, 35.6±10.81; P<0.01). NK 
cell number in the blood and spleen of tofacitinib-treated mice was decreased 
10-fold, and the percentage of cluster of differentiation (CD)11+CD27- NK cells 
was significantly reduced. MR16-1 [8 mg/mouse; once a week; intraperitoneal 
(i.p.)] or etanercept (1 mg/mouse; 3 times a week; i.p.) treatment did not 
affect the number of NK cells or lung metastasis. In the present study, 
immunosuppressants that target cytokines, including tofacitinib, were 
demonstrated to inhibit the proliferation and differentiation of NK cells, and 
exhibit the potential to promote cancer metastasis using a mouse model of lung 
metastasis.
