OBJECTIVES: The evaluation of the pharmacological profile of the dried 50% 
hydroalcoholic extract (50%HA) of Astragali radix in two different animal models 
of articular damage resembling osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Sodium monoiodoacetate (MIA) or complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) was 
intra-articular injected (day 0) in the rat tibiotarsal joint to induce damages 
mimicking osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis. Pain measurements (responses 
to non-noxious and noxious stimuli, spontaneous pain, articular pain) were 
assessed on days 7 and 14. On day 14, the tibiotarsal joints were explanted in 
order to measure the diameter and to assess histological evaluations. 
Furthermore, the plasmatic concentrations of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory 
cytokines were measured.
KEY FINDINGS: A single administration of 50%HA (300 mg/kg per os) significantly 
reduced both MIA-induced pain and CFA-induced pain (78% and 96% pain relief, 
respectively). The repeated administration prevented the development of 
hypersensitivity on day 14. The haematoxylin/eosin staining revealed that 50% HA 
attenuated joint alterations in MIA-injected rats, and furthermore, the joint 
inflammatory infiltrate was reduced in both models (by about 50%). In 
CFA-treated rats, 50%HA lowered the plasmatic levels of the pro-inflammatory 
cytokines interleukin-1β and tumour necrosis factor-α as well as the joint 
diameter.
CONCLUSIONS: The 50% hydroalcoholic extract of Astragali radix is a valuable 
candidate for the adjuvant treatment of articular diseases.
