The acute-phase proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) demonstrate high-level expression and pleiotropic 
biological effects, and contribute to the progression and persistence of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Acid hydrarthrosis is also an important pathological 
characteristic of RA, and the acid-sensing ion channel 1a (ASIC1a) plays a 
critical role in acidosis-induced chondrocyte cytotoxicity. However, the roles 
of IL-1β and TNF-α in acid-induced apoptosis of chondrocytes remain unclear. Rat 
adjuvant arthritis and primary articular chondrocytes were used as in vivo and 
in vitro model systems, respectively. ASIC1a expression in articular cartilage 
was increased and highly colocalized with nuclear factor (NF)-κB expression in 
vivo. IL-1β and TNF-α could upregulate ASIC1a expression. These cytokines 
activated mitogen-activated protein kinase and NF-κB pathways in chondrocytes, 
while the respective inhibitors of these signaling pathways could partially 
reverse the ASIC1a upregulation induced by IL-1β and TNF-α. Dual luciferase and 
gel-shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation-polymerase chain reaction 
demonstrated that IL-1β and TNF-α enhanced ASIC1a promoter activity in 
chondrocytes by increasing NF-κB DNA-binding activities, which was in turn 
prevented by the NF-κB inhibitor ammonium pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate. IL-1β and 
TNF-α also decreased cell viability but enhanced LDH release, intracellular Ca2+ 
concentration elevation, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, cleaved PARP 
and cleaved caspase-3/9 expression, and apoptosis in acid-stimulated 
chondrocytes, which effects could be abrogated by the specific ASIC1a inhibitor 
psalmotoxin-1 (PcTX-1), ASIC1a-short hairpin RNA or calcium chelating agent 
BAPTA-AM. These results indicate that IL-1β and TNF-α can augment 
acidosis-induced cytotoxicity through NF-κB-dependent up-regulation of ASIC1a 
channel expression in primary articular chondrocytes.
