Acid hydrarthrosis is another important pathological character in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), and acid-sensing ion channel 1a (ASIC1a) plays a destructive 
role in acidosis-induced articular chondrocyte cytotoxicity. Recently, ASIC2a 
has been reported to possess neuroprotective effect on acidosis-induced injury 
of neuronal cells. However, whether ASIC2a has an enhanced effect on the 
protective effect of blocking ASIC1a and ASIC3 against acid-induced chondrocyte 
apoptosis is still unclear. The aim of present study was to investigate the 
chondroprotective effect of ASIC2a with PcTx1 (ASIC1a specific blocker) and 
APETx2 (ASIC3 specific blocker) on acidosis-induced chondrocyte apoptosis. Our 
results revealed that acid (pH 6.0) decreased the cell viability and induced 
apoptosis of articular chondrocytes. PcTx1 and APETx2 combination significantly 
attenuated acidosis-induced chondrocyte cytotoxicity due to inhibit apoptosis, 
and this role could be enhanced by ASIC2a overexpression compared with the PcTx1 
and APETx2 combination alone group. Moreover, both the [Ca2+]i levels and the 
levels of phosphorylated ERK1/2 as well as p38 were further reduced in 
acidosis-induced chondrocytes after ASIC2a overexpression in the presence of 
PcTx1 and APETx2. Furthermore, ASIC2a overexpression also reduced acid-induced 
the expression of ASIC1a. In addition, ASIC2a overexpression further promoted 
the PcTx1 and APETx2-increased levels of type II collagen in acidosis-induced 
chondrocytes. Taken together, the current data suggested that ASIC2a 
overexpression might enhance the anti-apoptotic and protective role of PcTx1 and 
APETx2 against acid-induced rat articular chondrocyte apoptosis by regulating 
ASIC1a expression and the [Ca2+]i levels and at least in part, suppressing p38 
and ERK1/2 MAPK signaling pathways.
