Dried plum (DP), a rich source of polyphenols has been shown to have 
bone-preserving properties in both animal models of osteoporosis and 
postmenopausal women. We evaluated if DP alleviated the destruction of joints in 
transgenic mice (TG) that overexpress human tumor necrosis factor (TNF), a 
genetic model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). A four-week treatment of 20% DP diet 
in TG slowed the onset of arthritis and reduced bone erosions in the joints 
compared to TG on a regular diet. This was associated with fewer 
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) positive cells, suggesting decreased 
osteoclastogenesis. A DP diet also produced significant protection of articular 
cartilage and reduction of synovitis. Cultures of human synovial fibroblast in 
the presence of TNF showed a significant increase in inflammatory interleukin 
(IL)-1β, chemokines (monocyte chemoattractant protein-1: MCP1 & macrophage 
inflammatory protein-1 alpha: MIP1α), cartilage matrix metalloproteinases 
(MMP1&3), and an osteoclastogenic cytokine (receptor activator of nuclear 
factor-κB ligand: RANKL) compared to controls. Addition of neochlorogenic acid 
(NC), a major polyphenol in DP to these cultures resulted in down-regulation of 
these genes. In the cultures of mouse bone marrow macrophage, NC also repressed 
TNF-induced formation of osteoclasts and mRNA levels of cathepsin K and MMP9 
through inhibition of nuclear factor of activated T-cells, cytoplasmic 1 
(NFATc1) expression and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) activation. Our data 
suggested that dietary supplementation with DP inhibited TNF singling; leading 
to decreased erosions of bone and articular cartilage as well as synovitis.
