Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease affecting nearly 1% of 
adults worldwide. This study aimed to investigate whether sophocarpine is a 
potential drug for treating RA. The cytotoxicity of sophocarpine to 
RA-fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) was evaluated using 
3-[4,-dimethylthiazol-2-y]-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assays kit and 
released lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assays. The transcription of 
proinflammatory cytokines in RA-FLSs was analyzed by reverse transcription and 
real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The proteins levels were further 
verified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The alterations in the 
mediators of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and nuclear factor κB 
(NF-κB) signaling pathways were tested by western blotting. The clinical effects 
of sophocarpine were evaluated in type II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in 
DBA-/1 mouse model by scoring their clinical responses, synovitis, and cartilage 
destructions, and ELISA was employed to analyze the concentrations of 
proinflammatory cytokines in the serum of CIA mice. The results showed that 
sophocarpine contained low cytotoxicity to RA-FLS cells, and it was capable to 
downregulate the expressions of LPS-induced proinflammatory cytokines. The 
suppressions of MAPK and NF-κB signaling pathways by sophocarpine were also 
found in LPS-induced RA-FLSs. The attenuation of the symptoms in CIA mouse model 
were significant, in which concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines were 
decreased after the sophocarpine treatment. In this study, we demonstrated the 
potential of sophocarpine in treating RA, both in vitro and in vivo. 
Sophocarpine may be a potential drug in treating human RA.
