OBJECTIVES: Previous studies have shown that aquaporin 1 (AQP1) is up-regulated 
in synovium and cartilage of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients and that AQP1 
may be involved in joint swelling and synovial inflammation. This study was 
aimed to investigate the potential therapeutic effect of acetazolamide (AZ, an 
AQP1 inhibitor) on rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) and explore its related 
mechanisms.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rat AIA was induced by complete Freund's adjuvant. The 
effect of AZ on rat AIA was evaluated by secondary hind paw swelling, arthritis 
index, TNF-α and IL-1β serum levels and histological examination of ankle joint. 
Proteoglycans expression and mRNA levels of type-II collagen (COII) and aggrecan 
in cartilage were measured by alcian blue staining and real-time PCR, 
respectively. The protein levels of AQP1, IκBα, phospho-IκBα (p-IκBα), NF-κB p65 
and phospho-NF-κB p65 (p-NF-κB p65) in synovial tissues were detected by western 
blot.
RESULTS: AZ treatment could inhibit secondary hind paw swelling and arthritis 
index, reduce serum levels of TNF-α and IL-1β, and ameliorate pathological 
changes of ankle joint in AIA rats. AZ increased proteoglycans production and 
mRNA levels of COII and aggrecan in cartilage tissues. Moreover, AZ decreased 
AQP1 protein level and suppressed the activation of NF-κB pathway in synovium, 
indicated by inhibiting the degradation and phosphorylation of IκBα and reducing 
p-NF-κB p65 protein level.
CONCLUSIONS: AZ as an AQP1 inhibitor has a powerful therapeutic effect on rat 
AIA via inhibiting NF-κB activation, suggesting AQP1 inhibition might be of 
potential clinical interest in RA treatment.
