Effective treatment of rheumatoid arthritis can be mediated by native chicken 
type II collagen (nCCII), recombinant peptide containing nCCII tolerogenic 
epitopes (CTEs), or a therapeutic DNA vaccine encoding the full-length CCOL2A1 
cDNA. As recombinant CCII (rCCII) might avoid potential pathogenic virus 
contamination during nCCII preparation or chromosomal integration and oncogene 
activation associated with DNA vaccines, here we evaluated the importance of 
propeptide and telopeptide domains on rCCII triple helix molecular assembly. We 
constructed pC- and pN-procollagen (without N- or C-propeptides, respectively) 
as well as CTEs located in the triple helical domain lacking both propeptides 
and telopeptides, and expressed these in yeast Pichia pastoris host strain GS115 
(his4, Mut+) simultaneously with recombinant chicken prolyl-4-hydroxylase α and 
β subunits. Both pC- and pN-procollagen monomers accumulated inside P. pastoris 
cells, whereas CTE was assembled into homotrimers with stable conformation and 
secreted into the supernatants, suggesting that the large molecular weight pC-or 
pN-procollagens were retained within the endoplasmic reticulum whereas the 
smaller CTEs proceeded through the secretory pathway. Furthermore, resulting 
recombinant chicken type II collagen pCα1(II) can induced collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) rat model, which seems to be as effective as the current 
standard nCCII. Notably, protease digestion assays showed that rCCII could 
assemble in the absence of C- and N-propeptides or telopeptides. These findings 
provide new insights into the minimal structural requirements for rCCII 
expression and folding.
