Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) are a key cell type involved in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) progression. We previously identified the KCa1.1 potassium 
channel (Maxi-K, BK, Slo 1, KCNMA1) as a regulator of FLSs and found that KCa1.1 
inhibition reduces disease severity in RA animal models. However, systemic 
KCa1.1 block causes multiple side effects. In this study, we aimed to determine 
whether the KCa1.1 β1-3-specific venom peptide blocker iberiotoxin (IbTX) 
reduces disease severity in animal models of RA without inducing major side 
effects. We used immunohistochemistry to identify IbTX-sensitive KCa1.1 subunits 
in joints of rats with a model of RA. Patch-clamp and functional assays were 
used to determine whether IbTX can regulate FLSs through targeting KCa1.1. We 
then tested the efficacy of IbTX in ameliorating disease in two rat models of 
RA. Finally, we determined whether IbTX causes side effects including 
incontinence or tremors in rats, compared with those treated with the 
small-molecule KCa1.1 blocker paxilline. IbTX-sensitive subunits of KCa1.1 were 
expressed by FLSs in joints of rats with experimental arthritis. IbTX inhibited 
KCa1.1 channels expressed by FLSs from patients with RA and by FLSs from rat 
models of RA and reduced FLS invasiveness. IbTX significantly reduced disease 
severity in two rat models of RA. Unlike paxilline, IbTX did not induce tremors 
or incontinence in rats. Overall, IbTX inhibited KCa1.1 channels on FLSs and 
treated rat models of RA without inducing side effects associated with 
nonspecific KCa1.1 blockade and could become the basis for the development of a 
new treatment of RA.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.
