Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) animal model is associated with systemic 
manifestations, including alteration of lipid metabolism. In the present study, 
one possible pathway of altered lipid metabolism is proposed. Specimens of joint 
tissue and plasma were collected from the CIA and control rats, and quantitative 
analysis of lipid components was performed by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy technique. Correlation analysis was performed between the level of 
lipid components and antioxidant enzymes, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), lipid 
peroxidation (LP), and cytokines in joint tissue and plasma. Differentiation 
between the CIA and control rats was established on the basis of the quantity of 
lipid components in the joint tissue and plasma. Positive correlation was 
observed for all the enzymes vs. lipid components as well as LP vs. lipid 
components in plasma and joint tissue. Positive correlation was observed for 
enzymes in plasma and joint tissue. A negative correlation was observed in 
between the plasma and joint tissue with the level of lipid components. Cytokine 
levels were also correlated with the level of lipid components and ratios of 
saturated fatty acids/unsaturated fatty acids in plasma and joint tissue. 
Inflammatory disease activity in CIA rats with synovitis brought about a 
significant change in lipid metabolism. Taken together, the results of our study 
are delineating a possible pathway of altered lipid metabolism in the CIA rat 
model, thereby contributing further to an understanding of the pathophysiology 
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
