p70 S6 kinase (S6K1) is a serine/threonine kinase that phosphorylates the 
insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) at serine 1101 and desensitizes insulin 
receptor signaling. S6K1 hyperactivation due to overnutrition leads to 
hyperglycemia and type 2 diabetes. Our recent study showed that A77 1726, the 
active metabolite of the anti-rheumatoid arthritis (RA) drug leflunomide, is an 
inhibitor of S6K1. Whether leflunomide can control hyperglycemia and sensitize 
the insulin receptor has not been tested. Here we report that A77 1726 increased 
AKTS473/T308 and S6K1T389 phosphorylation but decreased S6S235/236 and 
IRS-1S1101 phosphorylation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, C2C12 and L6 myotubes. A77 1726 
increased insulin receptor tyrosine phosphorylation and binding of the p85 
subunit of the PI-3 kinase to IRS-1. A77 1726 enhanced insulin-stimulated 
glucose uptake in L6 myotubes and 3T3-L1 adipocytes, and enhanced 
insulin-stimulated glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4) translocation to the 
plasma membrane of L6 cells. Finally, we investigated the anti-hyperglycemic 
effect of leflunomide on ob/ob and high-fat diet (HFD)-induced diabetes mouse 
models. Leflunomide treatment normalized blood glucose levels and overcame 
insulin resistance in glucose and insulin tolerance tests in ob/ob and HFD-fed 
mice but had no effect on mice fed a normal chow diet (NCD). Leflunomide 
treatment increased AKTS473/T308 phosphorylation in the fat and muscle of ob/ob 
mice but not in normal mice. Our results suggest that leflunomide sensitizes the 
insulin receptor by inhibiting S6K1 activity in vitro, and that leflunomide 
could be potentially useful for treating patients with both RA and diabetes.
