BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients are at increased risk of insulin 
resistance (IR); however, the specific mechanisms mediating this association are 
currently unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the inflammatory activity associated with RA 
accounts for the observed defective glucose metabolism and lipid metabolism in 
these patients.
METHODS: We followed two main strategies: (i) extensive metabolic profiling of a 
RA cohort of 100 patients and 50 healthy control subjects and (ii) mechanistic 
studies carried out in both a collagen-induced arthritis mouse model and 3T3-L1 
adipocytes treated with conditioned serum from RA patients.
RESULTS: Following the exclusion of obese and diabetic subjects, data from RA 
patients demonstrated a strong link between the degree of systemic inflammation 
and the development of IR. These results were strengthened by the observation 
that induction of arthritis in mice resulted in a global inflammatory state 
characterized by defective carbohydrate and lipid metabolism in different 
tissues. Adipose tissue was most susceptible to the RA-induced metabolic 
alterations. These metabolic effects were confirmed in adipocytes treated with 
serum from RA patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that the metabolic disturbances associated with RA 
depend on the degree of inflammation and identify inflammation of adipose tissue 
as the initial target leading to IR and the associated molecular disorders of 
carbohydrate and lipid homeostasis. Thus, we anticipate that therapeutic 
strategies based on tighter control of inflammation and flares could provide 
promising approaches to normalize and/or prevent metabolic alterations 
associated with RA.
