A prominent example of human therapeutic protein-drug interaction (TP-DI) is 
between methotrexate (MTX) and anti-TNFα mAbs. One plausible mechanism for this 
TP-DI is through the pharmacodynamic effect of MTX on immunogenicity. However, 
there is no definitive evidence to substantiate this mechanism, and other 
competing hypotheses, such as MTX suppressing FcγRI expression thereby affecting 
mAb PK, have also been proposed. In order to understand this mechanism, a 
cynomolgus monkey study was conducted using golimumab as a model compound. 
Golimumab elicited high incidences of immunogenicity in healthy cynomolgus 
monkeys. Concomitant dosing of MTX delayed the onset and reduced the magnitude 
of anti-drug antibody (ADA) formation. The impact of MTX on golimumab PK 
correlated with the ADA status. Prior to ADA formation, MTX has no discernable 
effect on golimumab PK. Additionally, no alteration in FcγRI expression was 
observed following MTX treatment. The impact of MTX on golimumab immunogenicity 
and PK has been observed in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic 
arthritis (PsA), and ankylosing spondylitis. In a representative phase 3 study 
of golimumab in patients with PsA, patients not receiving concomitant MTX was 
reported to have ~ 30% lower steady-state trough golimumab levels compared to 
those who received MTX. However, further analysis showed that PsA patients who 
were negative for ADA in both treatment groups had comparable trough levels of 
golimumab. Taken together, our results suggest that the mechanism of TP-DI 
between MTX and golimumab can mostly be attributed to the pharmacodynamic effect 
of MTX, i.e., the lowering of immunogenicity and immunogenicity-mediated 
clearance of mAbs.
