The serotonin transporter (SERT) facilitates high affinity reuptake of 5-HT from 
the extracellular fluid and dysregulation of transporter function has been 
implicated in a range of mood disorders including depression. Recent studies 
have linked immune system activation to depression as well as to altered 
serotonin transporter activity. Advancing previous studies, which have mainly 
focussed on acute effects of immune system activation, in this study we used 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in mice as a model of chronic inflammatory 
disease, to investigate the effect of prolonged inflammation on brain SERT 
function and behaviour. We found that 5-6 weeks after immunisation, CIA mice 
display anhedonia, a core depression-like behaviour. Behavioural symptoms are 
temporally correlated with a region-specific upregulation of SERT activity in 
the hippocampus, which occurs at a post-translational level and is independent 
of SERT trafficking. Kinetic analysis of 5-HT uptake revealed that the elevation 
of transporter activity is due to an increase in 5-HT transport capacity (Vmax) 
with no change in apparent Km values, suggesting that different regulatory 
mechanisms govern SERT modulation under chronic versus acute inflammatory 
conditions. Protein expression of tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 (TNFR1) was 
specifically upregulated in the hippocampus of CIA mice, indicating altered TNFα 
signalling. Anti-TNFα treatment using etanercept not only diminished joint 
inflammation, but also prevented the development of anhedonia and the 
upregulation of SERT activity in the hippocampus, suggesting a key role for TNFα 
signalling in brain function regulation in this disease model. Our study 
provides novel insight into molecular mechanisms underlying mood symptoms in 
chronic inflammatory diseases, with particular relevance to rheumatoid 
arthritis.
