Spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) is involved in regulation of B-cell receptor (BCR) 
and Fc receptor downstream signal pathways. Syk plays an essential role in 
production of inflammatory mediators and differentiation in various immune cells 
and is therefore an attractive target for treating inflammatory conditions, such 
as autoimmune and allergic diseases. We identified TAS05567 as a highly 
selective Syk inhibitor and evaluated its therapeutic potential in animal 
models. In vitro biochemical assays were performed with available kinase assay 
panels. Inhibitory effects of TAS05567 on immune cells were analyzed by 
assessing the Syk downstream signaling pathway and production of inflammatory 
factors. In vivo effects of TAS05567 were evaluated in animal models of 
autoimmune diseases and antigen-specific IgE transgenic mice. TAS05567 inhibited 
only 4 of 191 kinases tested but inhibited Syk enzymatic activity with high 
potency. TAS05567 inhibited BCR-dependent signal transduction in Ramos cells, 
FcγR-mediated tumor necrosis factor-α production in THP-1 cells, and 
FcεR-mediated histamine release from RBL-2H3 cells. In rheumatoid arthritis 
models, TAS05567 suppressed hind-paw swelling in a dose-dependent manner 
compared with vehicle. Moreover, TAS05667 markedly reduced histopathologic 
scores in an established rat arthritis model. In a mouse immune thrombocytopenic 
purpura model, platelet counts were reduced with injection of anti-platelet 
antibody. TAS05567 prevented the platelet count decrease in a dose-dependent 
manner. Finally, TAS05567 treatment suppressed IgE-mediated ear swelling in 
vivo. Collectively, our data indicate TAS05567 is a selective Syk inhibitor and 
potential therapeutic candidate for treating humoral immune-mediated 
inflammatory conditions such as autoimmune and allergic diseases.

Copyright © 2018 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.
