Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease whose major 
characteristics persistent joint inflammation that results in joint destruction 
and failure of the function. Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rat is an 
autoimmune disease model and in many ways shares features with RA. The CIA is 
associated with systemic manifestations, including alterations in the 
metabolism. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy-based metabolomics has 
been successfully applied to the perchloric acid extract of the joint tissue of 
CIA rat and control rat for the analysis of aqueous metabolites. GPC 
(Glycerophosphocholine), carnitine, acetate, and creatinine were important 
discriminators of CIA rats as compared to control rats. Level of lactate 
(significance; p = 0.004), alanine (p = 0.025), BCA (Branched-chain amino acids) 
(p = 0.006) and creatinine (p = 0.023) was significantly higher in CIA rats as 
compared to control rats. Choline (p = 0.038) and GPC (p = 0.009) were 
significantly reduced in CIA rats as compared to control rats. Choline to GPC 
correlation was good and negative (Pearson correlation = -0.63) for CIA rats as 
well as for control rats (Pearson correlation = -0.79). All these analyses 
collectively considered as metabolic fingerprinting of the joint tissue of CIA 
rat as compared to control rat. The metabolic fingerprinting of joint tissue of 
CIA rats was different as compared to control rats. The metabolic fingerprinting 
reflects inflammatory disease activity in CIA rats with synovitis, demonstrating 
that underlying inflammatory process drives significant changes in metabolism 
that can be measured in the joint tissue. Therefore, the outcome of this study 
may be helpful for understanding the mechanism of metabolic processes in RA. 
This may be also helpful for the development of advanced diagnostic methods and 
therapy for RA.
