A series of natural compounds have been implicated to be useful in regulating 
the pathogenesis of various autoimmune diseases. The present study demonstrated 
that the Scutellariae radix compounds baicalein and baicalin may serve as drugs 
for the treatment of autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and 
inflammatory bowel disease. Following the administration of baicalein and 
baicalin in vivo, T cell‑mediated autoimmune diseases in the mouse model were 
profoundly ameliorated: In the collagen‑induced arthritis model (CIA), the 
severity of the disease was reduced by baicalein and, consistently, baicalein 
was demonstrated to suppress T cell proliferation in CIA mice. In the dextran 
sodium sulfate (DSS)‑induced colitis model, the disease was attenuated by 
baicalin, and baicalin promoted colon epithelial cell (CEC) proliferation 
in vitro. The present study further revealed that the mRNA expression of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)3 and STAT4 in the 
tyrosine‑protein kinase JAK‑STAT signaling pathway in T cells was downregulated 
by baicalein, contributing to its regulation of T cell proliferation. However, 
in the DSS model, the STAT4 transcription in CECs, which are the target cells of 
activated T cells in the gut, was downregulated by baicalin, suggesting that 
baicalein and baicalin mediated similar STAT expression in different cell types 
in autoimmune diseases. In conclusion, the similarly structured compounds 
baicalein and baicalin selectively exhibited therapeutic effects on autoimmune 
diseases by regulating cell proliferation and STAT gene expression, albeit in 
different cell types.
