Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a painful chronic autoimmune disease affecting the 
joints. Its first-line therapy, Methotrexate (MTX), although effective in 
ameliorating the progress of the disease, induces hepatotoxicity over long-term 
usage. Thus, seeking natural compounds with fewer side effects could be an 
alternative therapeutic approach. This study aimed to investigate the 
anti-inflammatory, antiarthritic, and antioxidative effects of synthetic 
trans-Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ9-THC) dissolved in sesame oil (Dronabinol) 
against MTX in adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rat model. Daily oral 
administration of Δ9-THC/sesame oil, over a period of 21 days, was well 
tolerated in arthritic rats with no particular psychoactive side effects. It 
markedly attenuated the severity of clinical manifestations, recovered the 
histopathological changes in tibiotarsal joints, and repressed the splenomegaly 
in arthritic rats. Δ9-THC/sesame oil therapy showed similar effects to MTX in 
neutralizing the inflammatory process of AIA, through attenuating erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR) scores and proinflammatory cytokines, including tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin 1-beta (IL-1β), and interleukin-6 
(IL-6) levels, to normal values. As opposed to MTX, this natural combination 
markedly protected the liver of arthritic rats and downregulated the induced 
oxidative stress by increasing the antioxidant defense system such as activities 
of catalase and superoxide dismutase (SOD) and levels of glutathione (GSH). 
These results suggest promising effects for the clinical use of Δ9-THC/sesame 
oil therapy in alleviating arthritic clinical signs as well as arthritis-induced 
liver injury.
