OBJECTIVES: While new treatments for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have markedly 
improved disease control by targeting immune/inflammatory pathways, current 
treatments rarely induce remission, underscoring the need for therapies that 
target other aspects of the disease. Little is known about the regulation of 
disease severity and joint damage, which are major predictors of disease 
outcome, and might be better or complementary targets for therapy. In this 
study, we aimed to discover and characterise a new arthritis severity gene.
METHODS: An unbiased and phenotype-driven strategy including studies of unique 
congenic rat strains was used to identify new arthritis severity and joint 
damage genes. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) from rats and patients with RA 
expressing or not Huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (HIP1) were studied for 
invasiveness, morphology and cell signalling. HIP1 knockout mice were used in in 
vivo confirmatory studies. Paired t-test was used.
RESULTS: DNA sequencing and subcongenic strains studied in pristane-induced 
arthritis identified a new amino acid changing functional variant in HIP1. HIP1 
was required for the increased invasiveness of FLS from arthritic rats and from 
patients with RA. Knocking down HIP1 expression reduced receptor tyrosine 
kinase-mediated responses in RA FLS, including RAC1 activation, affecting actin 
cytoskeleton and cell morphology and interfering with the formation of 
lamellipodia, consistent with reduced invasiveness. HIP1 knockout mice were 
protected in KRN serum-induced arthritis and developed milder disease.
CONCLUSION: HIP1 is a new arthritis severity gene and a potential novel 
prognostic biomarker and target for therapy in RA.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2018. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.
