Because the excessive apoptosis of articular chondrocytes contributes to 
extracellular matrix (ECM) loss and cartilage damage in rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), inhibiting chondrocyte apoptosis might be a promising strategy for RA. 
Aquaporin1 (AQP1) is overexpressed in RA cartilage and synovial tissues, and 
play a vital pathogenic role in RA development. Particularly, we previously 
reported that acetazolamide (AZ) as an AQP1 inhibitor suppressed secondary 
inflammation and promoted ECM production in cartilage of adjuvant-induced 
arthritis rats. Here, we investigated the antiapoptotic effect of AZ on 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β)-induced apoptosis, a classic in vitro model of 
chondrocyte apoptosis. AZ treatment could inhibit IL-1β-induced apoptosis, 
evidenced by increasing cell viability, relieving apoptotic nuclear morphology, 
decreasing apoptosis rates, and restoring mitochondrial membrane potential. 
Additionally, AZ reversed IL-1β-induced decrease of Bcl-2 protein and reduced 
IL-1β-induced increases of Bax and caspase 3 protein, accompanied by inhibiting 
IκBα degradation and phosphorylation in cytoplasm, reducing NF-κB p65 protein 
level in nucleus and preventing NF-κB p65 translocation from cytoplasm to 
nucleus. In conclusion, our findings indicated that AZ could effectively 
attenuate IL-1β-induced chondrocyte apoptosis mediated by regulating the protein 
levels of apoptosis-related genes and inhibiting the activation of NF-κB signal 
pathway, suggesting that AZ might be of potential clinical interest in RA 
treatment.
