Loss-of-function or knockout mouse models have established a fundamental role 
for the RNAse III enzyme DICER1 in development and tissue morphogenesis and/or 
homeostasis. These functions are currently assumed to result mainly from the 
DICER1-dependent biogenesis of microRNAs which exhibit important gene expression 
regulatory properties. However, non-canonical DICER1 functions have recently 
emerged. These include interaction with the DNA damage response (DDR) pathway 
and the processing of cytotoxic non-coding RNAs, suggesting that DICER1 might 
also participate in the regulation of major cellular processes through 
miRNA-independent mechanisms. Recent findings indicated that reduced Dicer1 
expression, which correlates with worsened symptoms in mouse models of joint 
inflammation, is also noted in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) harvested from 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, as opposed to FLS cultured from biopsies of 
osteoarthritic patients. In addition, low DICER1 levels are associated with the 
establishment of cellular stress and its associated responses, such as cellular 
senescence. Senescent and/or stressed cells are associated with an inflammatory 
secretome (cytokines and chemokines), as well as with "find-me" and "eat-me" 
signals which will attract and activate the innate immune compartment (NK cells, 
macrophages, and neutrophils) to be eliminated. Failure of this 
immunosurveillance mechanism and improper restauration of homeostasis could lead 
to the establishment of a systemic and chronic inflammatory state. In this 
review, we suggest that reduced DICER1 expression contributes to a vicious cycle 
during which accumulating inflammation and premature senescence, combined to 
inadequate innate immunity responses, creates the appropriate conditions for the 
initiation and/or progression of autoimmune-autoinflammatory diseases, such as 
RA.
