Inflammation is a major contributor to the secondary damage that occurs after 
spinal cord injury (SCI). The inflammatory response is coordinated by many 
different signaling modalities including the epigenetic modification of 
promoters and enhancers. Bromodomain and extraterminal domain-containing 
proteins (BETs; Brd2, Brd3, Brd4, BrdT) are epigenetic readers that bind 
acetylated histones to promote transcription of pro-inflammatory genes. BET 
inhibition is anti-inflammatory in animal models of cancer, rheumatoid 
arthritis, and coronary artery disease. However, the role of BETs in 
neuroinflammation remains largely unexplored. In this study, we investigated the 
role of BETs in promoting inflammation in neural cells and the ability of the 
BET inhibitor JQ1 to decrease inflammation acutely after SCI. Expression of BET 
mRNA was assessed via qPCR in purified primary mouse macrophages, astrocytes, 
neurons, oligodendrocytes, and microglia, as well as in naïve, sham-injured, and 
contusion-injured mouse spinal cord. Brd2, Brd3, and Brd4 mRNA were expressed in 
all purified primary neural cells and in the uninjured and injured mouse spinal 
cord. BET inhibition significantly attenuated proinflammatory signaling in all 
activated cell populations in vitro. To investigate the effects of BET 
modulation after SCI, the BET inhibitor JQ1 was injected intraperitoneally 
(30 mg/kg, bidaily) 3 h after spinal cord contusion in adult female C57BL/6 
mice. By 3 days post-injury, BET inhibition significantly decreased 
pro-inflammatory cytokine expression and leukocyte recruitment to the injury 
site. However, this decrease did not lead to locomotor improvements or smaller 
lesion size. Taken together, our data implicate BETs as regulators of multiple 
key pro-inflammatory cytokines, and suggest that BETs can be pharmacologically 
inhibited to reduce inflammation acutely after SCI.
