The present study aimed to construct a rat model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) to 
evaluate changes in pathology, the expression of inflammatory factors and 
regulation of signaling pathways. The protective effect of tetrandrine (Tet) on 
tissue lesions induced by RA was also investigated. A total of 60 Wistar rats 
(100-200 g) were randomly divided into six groups (n=10 per group), namely a 
blank (NC) group, model group, methotrexate (MTX) group (3 mg/kg body weight), 
high-dose Tet group (31.25 mg/kg body weight), medium-dose Tet group (18.75 
mg/kg body weight) and low-dose Tet group (6.25 mg/kg body weight). A rat model 
of RA was induced via injection of 0.1 ml complete Freund's adjuvant into the 
right rear toe. Toe swelling rate, arthritis index and immune organ index were 
calculated. In addition, cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 expression at the mRNA and 
protein level in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of rats were 
determined by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and 
western blot analysis, respectively. Serum concentrations of inflammatory 
factors were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays. It was observed 
that treatment with Tet alleviated the severity of rear toe swelling associated 
with RA in rats. Furthermore, Tet exerted anti-inflammatory and 
immunosuppressive effects in the rat model of RA. Tet also reduced the 
expression of COX-2 in PBMCs and lowered the concentrations of inflammatory 
factors in the serum of RA rats. The present data indicate that Tet may exert 
pharmacological effects in the treatment of RA. The mechanism of action of Tet 
may be associated with the regulation of inflammatory factors and the inhibition 
of immune organs.
