Autoimmune diseases are a group of heterogeneous condition that occur secondary 
to the intrinsic loss of tolerance to self- antigens. In genetically susceptible 
individuals, the complex interplay of environmental factors and epigenetic 
deregulations have been proposed to drive disease etiopathogenesis. Various 
environmental variables have been identified including viral infections, 
exposure to pollutants, stress and dietary factors. Sodium, a major constituent 
of salt is essential for mammalian physiology. However, high salt intake may 
play a role in the development of autoimmune diseases. Several lines of evidence 
point toward the role of high sodium intake in reversing the suppressive effects 
of Regulatory T cells (Tregs) and instead promoting cellular shift toward 
T-helper (Th)-1 and Th17 pro-inflammatory phenotypes. These effects have been 
attributed to cascade of events that ultimately results in downstream activation 
of serum glucocorticoid kinase 1 (Sgk1). In vivo, various autoimmune animal 
models have confirmed the role of high sodium diet in the emergence and the 
exacerbation of autoimmune conditions including for instance Experimental 
Autoimmune Encephalomyelitis model for multiple sclerosis, MRL/lpr mouse model 
for lupus nephritis, collagen induced arthritis model for rheumatoid arthritis, 
and dextran sulfate sodium induced colitis, and TNBS-induced colitis models for 
Crohn's disease. Clinical epidemiological studies are scarce. High sodium intake 
was associated with increased risk of rheumatoid arthritis disease emergence. In 
multiple sclerosis, some studies suggest a relation to clinical exacerbation 
rates however other studies did not corroborate these results. Taken together, 
high dietary salt intake plays a role in the spectrum of autoimmune disease 
etiology. Further research is warranted to better characterize such relationship 
and assist in identifying individuals that would benefit from dietary salt 
restriction.
