Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by 
synovial tissue inflammation and joint destruction associated with the 
activation of angiogenesis. Exosomes, which play a role in cell-to-cell 
communication as carriers of genetic information, transfer microRNAs (miRNAs or 
miRs) between cells and have been studied as delivery vehicles for therapeutic 
molecules. The aim of the current study was to investigate the therapeutic 
effect of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-derived miR-150-5p exosomes on joint 
destruction in RA. The expression and secretion of miR-150-5p, matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP) 14, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in RA 
patients and fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) were examined by quantitative 
RT-PCR, ELISA, and Western blotting. Immunohistochemistry was used to assess 
angiogenesis. MSCs were transfected with an miR-150-5p expression plasmid, and 
MSC-derived exosomes were harvested. The effect of MSC-derived miR-150-5p 
exosomes (Exo-150) on MMP14 and VEGF expression was examined. The effects of 
Exo-150 on cell migration and invasion in cytokine-stimulated FLS from RA 
patients were examined by HUVEC tube formation and transwell assays. The effect 
of Exo-150 in vivo was examined in a collagen-induced arthritis mouse model. 
Exo-150 decreased migration and invasion in RA FLS and downregulated tube 
formation in HUVECs by targeting MMP14 and VEGF. Injection of Exo-150 reduced 
hind paw thickness and the clinical arthritic scores in collagen-induced 
arthritis mice. Exo-150 reduced joint destruction by inhibiting synoviocyte 
hyperplasia and angiogenesis. Exosomes facilitate the direct intracellular 
transfer of miRNAs between cells and represent a potential therapeutic strategy 
for RA.
