Cigarette smoke (CS)-induced accumulation of mitochondrial damage has been 
widely implicated in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) pathogenesis. 
Mitophagy plays a crucial role in eliminating damaged mitochondria, and is 
governed by the PINK1 (PTEN induced putative protein kinase 1)-PRKN (parkin RBR 
E3 ubiquitin protein ligase) pathway. Although both increased PINK1 and reduced 
PRKN have been implicated in COPD pathogenesis in association with mitophagy, 
there are conflicting reports for the role of mitophagy in COPD progression. To 
clarify the involvement of PRKN-regulated mitophagy in COPD pathogenesis, prkn 
knockout (KO) mouse models were used. To illuminate how PINK1 and PRKN regulate 
mitophagy in relation to CS-induced mitochondrial damage and cellular 
senescence, overexpression and knockdown experiments were performed in airway 
epithelial cells (AEC). In comparison to wild-type mice, prkn KO mice 
demonstrated enhanced airway wall thickening with emphysematous changes 
following CS exposure. AEC in CS-exposed prkn KO mice showed accumulation of 
damaged mitochondria and increased oxidative modifications accompanied by 
accelerated cellular senescence. In vitro experiments showed PRKN overexpression 
was sufficient to induce mitophagy during CSE exposure even in the setting of 
reduced PINK1 protein levels, resulting in attenuation of mitochondrial ROS 
production and cellular senescence. Conversely PINK1 overexpression failed to 
recover impaired mitophagy caused by PRKN knockdown, indicating that PRKN 
protein levels can be the rate-limiting factor in PINK1-PRKN-mediated mitophagy 
during CSE exposure. These results suggest that PRKN levels may play a pivotal 
role in COPD pathogenesis by regulating mitophagy, suggesting that PRKN 
induction could mitigate the progression of COPD. Abbreviations: AD: Alzheimer 
disease; AEC: airway epithelial cells; BALF: bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; AKT: 
AKT serine/threonine kinase; CALCOCO2/NDP52: calcium binding and coiled-coil 
domain 2; CDKN1A: cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1A; CDKN2A: cyclin dependent 
kinase inhibitor 2A; COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; CS: cigarette 
smoke; CSE: CS extract; CXCL1: C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 1; CXCL8: C-X-C 
motif chemokine ligand 8; HBEC: human bronchial epithelial cells; 4-HNE: 
4-hydroxynonenal; IL: interleukin; KO: knockout; LF: lung fibroblasts; LPS: 
lipopolysaccharide; MAP1LC3/LC3: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3; 
MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; 8-OHdG: 
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine; OPTN: optineurin; PRKN: parkin RBR E3 ubiquitin 
protein ligase; PCD: programmed cell death; PFD: pirfenidone; PIK3C: 
phosphatidylinositol-4:5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit; PINK1: PTEN 
induced putative kinase 1; PTEN: phosphatase and tensin homolog; RA: rheumatoid 
arthritis; ROS: reactive oxygen species; SA-GLB1/Î²-Gal: 
senescence-associated-galactosidase, beta 1; SASP: senescence-associated 
secretory phenotype; SNP: single nucleotide polymorphism; TNF: tumor necrosis 
factor.
