Increasing evidence supports the association of periodontitis with rheumatoid 
arthritis. Even though a prominent role has been postulated for Porphyromonas 
gingivalis, many bacterial species contribute to the pathogenesis of periodontal 
disease. We therefore investigated the impact of Porphyromonas gingivalis as 
well as other major pathobionts on the development of both, periodontitis and 
arthritis in the mouse. Pathobionts used - either alone or in combination - were 
Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fusobacterium nucleatum and Aggregatibacter 
actinomycetemcomintans. Periodontitis was induced via oral gavage in SKG, DBA/1 
and F1 (DBA/1 Ã— B10.Q) mice and collagen-induced arthritis was provoked via 
immunization and boost with bovine collagen type II. Alveolar bone loss was 
quantified via micro computed tomography, arthritis was evaluated 
macroscopically and histologically and serum antibodies were assessed. Among the 
strains tested, only F1 mice were susceptible to P. gingivalis induced 
periodontitis and showed significant alveolar bone loss. Bone loss was 
paralleled by antibody titers against P. gingivalis. Of note, mice inoculated 
with the mix of all three pathobionts showed less alveolar bone loss than mice 
inoculated with P. gingivalis alone. However, oral inoculation with either F. 
nucleatum or A. actinomycetemcomintans alone accelerated subsequent arthritis 
onset and progression. This is the first report of a triple oral inoculation of 
pathobionts combined with collagen-induced arthritis in the mouse. In this 
interplay and this particular genetic setting, F. nucleatum and A. 
actinomycetemcomitans exerted a protective impact on P. gingivalis induced 
alveolar bone loss. By themselves they did not induce periodontitis yet 
accelerated arthritis onset and progression.
