BACKGROUND: Different adiponectin isoforms appear to be differentially involved 
in the pathogenesis of various diseases. The purpose of this study was to 
generate monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) specific to different adiponectin isoforms 
and investigate whether these mAbs have potential as therapeutic agents for such 
diseases.
METHODS: Hybridoma cells producing monoclonal antibodies were generated and 
screened using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and Western blotting for the 
production of mAbs recognizing human adiponectin isoforms.
RESULTS: The mAb from hybridoma clone KH7-41 recognized both the middle 
molecular weight (MMW) (hexamer) and low molecular weight (LMW) (trimer) 
isoforms of adiponectin in human serum, whereas the KH7-33 mAb detected only MMW 
(hexamer) adiponectin. The KH4-8 clone recognized both the high molecular weight 
(HMW) (multimer) and MMW adiponectin isoforms. However, in mouse and rat sera, 
the abovementioned antibodies recognized only the MMW isomer. These mAbs also 
recognized adiponectin in various human tissues, such as lung, kidney, and 
adipose tissues, although the three mAbs had different staining intensities. The 
mAb from clone KH4-8 effectively inhibited increases in interleukin-6 (IL-6) and 
IL-8 expression in recombinant adiponectin-stimulated human osteoblasts and 
human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Also, the mAbs KH7-33 and KH4-8 
significantly ameliorated rheumatic symptoms in a collagen-induced arthritis 
mouse model. This result suggests that these mAb treatments may ameliorate 
adiponectin-mediated inflammatory response.
CONCLUSIONS: mAbs against human adiponectin isomers can potentially be developed 
as therapeutic antibodies to target specific detrimental isoforms of adiponectin 
while maintaining the functions of beneficial isoforms.
