Periarticular osteopenia is the most specific hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). The renin-angiotensin system (RAS) in the synovium has been found to 
participate in the pathogenic process of RA. This study examined whether and how 
RAS regulates periarticular osteopenia in RA. The synovial tissues from patients 
with RA and osteoarthritis (OA) were prepared. Female Sprague-Dawley rats were 
treated with either saline, bovine type II collagen (CII) to induce arthritis 
(CIA), or CII combined with perindopril, an inhibitor of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE). Expressions of RAS components, including AT1R, AT2R and ACE, in 
human and rat synovial tissues were detected. Bone mass of rat joints was 
examined. Levels of RANKL, OPG and DKK-1 in rat synovium and expressions of 
TRAF6 and β-catenin in rat bone were examined. The results showed that AT1R, 
AT2R and ACE in human and rat synovium were up-regulated, but the increased ACE 
in rat synovial tissues was abrogated by perindopril. While CIA rats displayed 
increased bone resorption and decreased bone formation, perindopril treatment 
almost completely abrogated the RAS-mediated osteopenia, indicating that 
inhibition of ACE reduced the joint damages in rats. The expressions of RANKL 
and DKK-1 increased in CIA rats as compared with those in the control; TRAF6 was 
up-regulated and β-catenin was down-regulated in the bone tissues of CIA rats. 
The changes were then reversed by the use of perindopril. Our findings 
demonstrate that RAS in the synovium promotes periarticular osteopenia by 
increasing bone resorption and decreasing bone formation through modulating the 
RANKL/RANK/TRAF6 and Wnt/β-catenin pathways.
