Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease with a poor prognosis. Pyroptosis 
is a type of proinflammatory programmed cell death that is characterised by the 
activation of caspase-1 and secretion of the proinflammatory cytokines 
interleukin (IL)-1β/18. Previous reports have shown that pyroptosis is closely 
related to the development of some autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis. The decrease in the pH of joint fluid is a main pathogenic feature of 
RA and leads to excessive apoptosis in chondrocytes. Acid-sensitive ion channels 
(ASICs) are extracellular H+-activated cation channels that mainly influence Na+ 
and Ca2+ permeability. In this study, we investigated the role of Ca2+ in 
acid-sensing ion channel 1a-mediated chondrocyte pyroptosis in an adjuvant 
arthritis rat model. The expression of apoptosis-associated speck-like protein, 
NLRP3, caspase-1, ASIC 1a, IL-1β and IL-18 was upregulated in the joints of rats 
compared with that in normal rats, but the expression of Col2a in cartilage was 
decreased. However, these changes were reversed by amiloride, which is an 
inhibitor of ASIC1a. Extracellular acidosis significantly increased the 
expression of ASIC1a, IL-1β, IL-18, ASC, NLRP3 and caspase-1 and promoted the 
release of lactate dehydrogenase. Interestingly, Psalmotoxin-1 (Pctx-1) and 
BAPTA-AM inhibited these effects. These results indicate that ASIC1a mediates 
pyroptosis in chondrocytes from AA rats. The underlying mechanism may be 
associated with the ability of ASIC1a to promote [Ca2+]i and upregulate the 
expression of the NLRP3 inflammasome.
