BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) being an incapacitating disease requires 
early effective intervention. Considering Methotrexate (MTX)- the first line of 
treatment for RA- intoxicates the liver; therefore, alternative therapies with 
similar efficacy yet lower cytotoxicity are desired. Indole-3-Carbinol (I3C) 
which is found in cruciferous vegetables was examined for its possible 
therapeutic potentials in comparison with MTX by investigating its 
anti-inflammatory, anti-arthritic, anti-oxidant, and hepatoprotective potentials 
in adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rat model.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in Sprague Dawley rats by injection of Complete 
Freund's Adjuvant (CFA). Arthritic rats were treated with I3C and/or MTX. To 
examine the anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic effect, the following 
parameters were assessed: body weight, macroscopic scoring of the hind paw, the 
level of the pivotal cytokines (TNF-Î±, IL-6) heavily involved in the 
pathogenesis, spleen index, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. At a 
histological level, the tibiotarsal joint was stained with several specific 
stains. To assess the hepatoprotective and anti-oxidant effects, several 
oxidative stress parameters were monitored, and the liver histology was 
examined.
RESULTS: Both I3C and MTX attenuated the inflammation that was aggravated by 
arthritis by downregulating the inflammatory markers and mediators and 
alleviating the histopathological changes affecting the tibiotarsal joint. I3C 
attenuated the liver impairment that was initiated by arthritis and MTX 
treatment. It did so by downregulating the pro-oxidants and up-regulating the 
anti-oxidant defenses and by reducing the pathological changes affecting the 
liver.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that I3C is as potent as MTX as an 
anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic agent. In addition, I3C does so while 
protecting the liver from damage as opposed to MTX.
