Major human diseases caused by exotoxins produced by anaerobes include 
botulisms, tetanus, foodborne illness caused by enterotoxin-producing 
Clostridium perfringens, and diarrhea/colitis caused by toxigenic Clostridium 
difficile. Recently, enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF) has been 
recognized, that may be related to childhood diarrheal disease. Detection test 
of botulinal neurotoxin is hardly performed at clinical laboratories since the 
most reliable means of detection and identification of botulinal toxin is by 
using mouse toxicity and neutralization tests. Clinical laboratories should 
request the tests to a reference laboratory. Since tetanus is easily diagnosed 
clinically on the basis of its unique, recognizable sings, the bacteriological 
tests is not usually requested. C. perfringens foodborne illness can be 
confirmed by testing stool specimens or the suspect food(s) for enterotoxin by 
the reversed passive latex agglutination test or counting > 10 5 C. perfringens 
per g of suspected food or > 10 6 C. perfringens spores per g of stool. 
Diagnosis of C. difficile-associated diarrhea/colitis is confirmed by detection 
of toxins A or B of C. difficile and/or recovery of toxigenic C. difficile. 
Isolation of C. difficile strains or detection C. difficile-speciffic antigen 
from stool specimens is less diagnostic since nontoxic or toxin A positive-toxin 
B negative strains are prevalent in Japan. Reliable laboratory tests for 
ETBF-associated childhood diarrhea are not established yet although ETBF can be 
proved by polymerase chain reaction for detection of the enterotoxin gene.
