The in vitro and in vivo activities of T-3811ME, a novel des-F(6)-quinolone, 
were evaluated in comparison with those of some fluoroquinolones, including a 
newly developed one, trovafloxacin. T-3811, a free base of T-3811ME, showed a 
wide range of antimicrobial spectra, including activities against Chlamydia 
trachomatis, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In 
particular, T-3811 exhibited potent activity against various gram-positive 
cocci, with MICs at which 90% of the isolates are inhibited (MIC90s) of 0.025 to 
6.25 microgram/ml. T-3811 was the most active agent against 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and streptococci, including 
penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (PRSP). T-3811 also showed potent 
activity against quinolone-resistant gram-positive cocci with GyrA and ParC 
(GrlA) mutations. The activity of T-3811 against members of the family 
Enterobacteriaceae and nonfermentative gram-negative rods was comparable to that 
of trovafloxacin. In common with other fluoroquinolones, T-3811 was highly 
active against Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, and Legionella 
sp., with MIC90s of 0.0125 to 0.1 microgram/ml. T-3811 showed a potent activity 
against anaerobic bacteria, such as Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium 
difficile. T-3811 was the most active agent against C. trachomatis (MIC, 0.008 
microgram/ml) and M. pneumoniae (MIC90, 0.0313 microgram/ml). The activity of 
T-3811 against M. tuberculosis (MIC90, 0.0625 microgram/ml) was potent and 
superior to that of trovafloxacin. In experimental systemic infection with a 
GrlA mutant of S. aureus and experimental pneumonia with PRSP in mice, T-3811ME 
showed excellent therapeutic efficacy in oral and subcutaneous administrations.
