BACKGROUND: We have found that Clostridium difficile toxins can evoke hepatocyte 
acute-phase protein synthesis, and that this effect is dependent on a 
functioning interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor. The present study was undertaken to 
determine if C. difficile toxicity, as determined by actin rearrangement and 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release, also requires a functioning IL-1 receptor.
METHODS: Primary hepatocyte cultures were prepared from normal mice, knockout 
mice deficient in the IL-1-converting enzyme (ICE), and knockout mice deficient 
in the IL-1 p80 receptor. Hepatocytes were treated for 24 h with C. difficile 
culture extract, purified C. difficile toxin A, or purified C. difficile toxin 
B. The actin cytoskeleton was examined using confocal microscopy, and LDH 
release was measured by spectrophotometric analysis.
RESULTS: C. difficile culture extract, toxin A, and toxin B induced collapse of 
the actin cytoskeleton in hepatocytes from normal mice. Hepatocytes from both 
the ICE-deficient mice and the IL-1 p80 receptor-deficient mice demonstrated 
similar responses to both toxins. These toxins also induced significant LDH 
release in a concentration-dependent fashion in the normal hepatocytes and the 
ICE-deficient hepatocytes. However, no significant increase in LDH release was 
observed in hepatocytes from IL-1 p80 receptor-deficient mice.
CONCLUSIONS: C. difficile toxins induce actin cytoskeletal collapse independent 
of IL-1 or the IL-1 receptor. In contrast, toxin-stimulated LDH release was 
dependent on the presence of the IL-1 receptor. Thus, separate pathways appear 
to mediate toxic effects as manifested by actin rearrangement and LDH release.
