BACKGROUND & AIMS: The mechanism by which Clostridium difficile toxin A causes 
actin depolymerization and cell rounding involves toxin internalization and 
subsequent monoglucosylation of the Rho family of proteins. This study explored 
toxin internalization and effects on mitochondrial function before cell 
rounding.
METHODS: Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were exposed to toxin A, and 
mitochondrial localization was assayed by confocal microscopy. Mitochondrial 
function was measured by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) concentration, 
mitochondrial permeability, and leakage of cytochrome c.
RESULTS: Confocal microscopy showed toxin A colocalization with the 
mitochondrial protein GRP 75 at 5 minutes after toxin exposure. Between 5 and 15 
minutes, toxin A caused an 80% diminution in cellular ATP levels; cell rounding 
and Rho glucosylation commenced between 15 and 30 minutes. Toxin A also resulted 
in reduction of mitochondrial membrane potential and a 2-3-fold increase in 
reactive oxygen radicals. Preincubation of CHO cells with the antioxidants 
butylated hydroxyanisole or butylated hydroxytoluene blocked the toxin A-induced 
increase in oxygen radicals and diminished cell rounding. Western blot analysis 
of toxin A-exposed isolated mitochondria showed a direct effect of toxin A on 
leakage of cytochrome c.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that extensive mitochondrial damage occurs within 
15 minutes in CHO cells exposed to toxin A. Diminished ATP concentrations and 
increased oxygen radicals are likely to contribute to cytotoxicity from this 
bacterial toxin.
