3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors (statins) improve 
endothelial function. We determined whether withdrawal of statin therapy affects 
endothelium-dependent relaxation in mice and studied the underlying mechanism. 
Mice were treated with daily injections of cerivastatin (2 mg/kg per day SC), 
atorvastatin (1 and 10 mg/kg per day SC), or placebo. Vascular reactivity was 
studied in aortic rings from these mice after 10 days of treatment and after 
cessation of therapy for several days. Both statins improved 
endothelium-dependent relaxation to acetylcholine. Compared with control, 
withdrawal of statin treatment transiently (from day 4 to 7) attenuated 
endothelium-dependent relaxation. In vessels from animals subjected to 
atorvastatin withdrawal, the antioxidant tiron restored relaxations. Vascular 
superoxide anion generation was unaffected by statin therapy but was increased 
during withdrawal. In mice lacking the gp91phox subunit of the NADPH oxidase, no 
attenuation of acetylcholine-induced relaxation and no increase in superoxide 
generation were observed after withdrawal of atorvastatin. In human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells, statins, which decrease the membrane association of 
NADPH oxidase-activating Rac-1, increased the activity of this GTPase in 
whole-cell lysates. Withdrawal of statins induced a translocation of Rac-1 from 
the cytosol to the membrane and transiently increased NADPH-induced lucigenin 
chemiluminescence in membrane preparations. Rac-1 inactivation by Clostridium 
difficile toxin B inhibited the cerivastatin-induced oxygen radical production 
in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. These observations indicate that the 
withdrawal of statins induces endothelial dysfunction. The underlying mechanism 
involves activation of a gp91phox-containing NADPH oxidase by Rac-1 and the 
subsequent scavenging of endothelium-derived NO by superoxide anions generated 
from this enzyme.
