Clostridium difficile is the etiological agent of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea, a potentially serious condition frequently affecting elderly 
hospitalized patients. While tissue damage is primarily induced by two toxins, 
the mechanism of gut colonization, and particularly the role of bacterial 
adherence to the mucosa, remains to be clarified. Previous studies have shown 
binding of C. difficile whole cells to cultured cell lines and suggested the 
existence of multiple adhesins, only one of which has been molecularly 
characterized. In this paper, we have investigated tissue binding of C. 
difficile surface layer proteins (SLPs), which are the predominant outer surface 
components and are encoded by the slpA gene. The adherence of C. difficile to 
HEp-2 cells was studied by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and 
fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis, which showed that antibodies to the 
high-molecular-weight (MW) SLP inhibited adherence. Immunohistochemical analysis 
of human gastrointestinal tissue sections revealed strong binding both to the 
surface epithelium lining the digestive cavities and to the subjacent lamina 
propria, while glands were negative. A similar pattern was observed in the 
mouse. By using purified recombinant SLPs, we show that binding is largely 
mediated by the high-MW SLP. By Western blotting analysis, we have identified 
two potential ligands of the C. difficile SLPs, one of which may be specific to 
the gut. By using purified extracellular matrix components immobilized on 
nitrocellulose, we also show SLP binding to collagen I, thrombospondin, and 
vitronectin, but not to collagen IV, fibronectin, or laminin. These results 
raise the possibility that the SLPs play a role both in the initial colonization 
of the gut by C. difficile and in the subsequent inflammatory reaction.
