BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Sigma ligands display antisecretory activity against 
various secretagogues, suggesting antidiarrhoeal properties. In this study, we 
evaluated: (i) the antidiarrhoeal effect of JO 2871, a high affinity sigma 
ligand, in three models of toxigenic diarrhoea in mice; and (ii) the site and 
mechanism of action of this compound.
METHODS: Faeces were collected after toxin or vehicle administration in male 
DBA2 or NMRI mice. Diarrhoea was determined by cumulative stool weight (mg) over 
a 120 minute period. Diarrhoea was induced by intravenous administration of 
Salmonella enteriditis lipopolysaccharide (LPS), or oral administration of 
Escherichia coli heat stable (E coli-sta) or Clostridium difficile toxins. Two 
sigma ligands, igmesine and JO 2871, were administered either orally or 
intravenously, 60 and 30 minutes before the toxins, respectively. JO 2871 was 
also given orally 30 minutes after E coli-sta. In addition, JO 2871 was 
administered intracerebroventricularly five minutes before LPS and E coli-sta. 
BMY 14802 (1000 microg/kg orally), a sigma receptor antagonist, or 
cyclosomatostatin (CSS 1 microg/kg intravenously), a somatostatin antagonist, 
were given five minutes prior to JO 2871 in LPS, E coli-sta, and C difficile 
toxin treated mice. Gastric emptying and intestinal transit were evaluated after 
oral JO 2871 and BMY 14802 and intravenous CSS.
RESULTS: Stool weight measured 120 minutes after administration of the toxins 
was significantly increased. Oral JO 2871 and igmesine dose dependently 
inhibited toxigenic diarrhoea in all models. ED(50) values obtained using JO 
2871 (1-20 microg/kg) were more than 40 times lower than those obtained with 
igmesine. Oral JO 2871 given after E coli-sta also inhibited diarrhoea in a dose 
dependent manner (ED(50) 50 microg/kg). Both sigma ligands were active by the 
intravenous route on LPS and E coli-sta induced stool weight increases. JO 2871 
administered intracerebroventricularly failed to block this effect at any dose 
tested. Both BMY 14802 and CSS reversed the antidiarrhoeal effect of oral JO 
2871. JO 2871, BMY 14802, and CSS did not affect transit parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: JO 2871 exerts a potent oral antidiarrhoeal effect, acting 
peripherally through sigma sites and somatostatin release.
