To examine the contribution of different G-protein pathways to lysophosphatidic 
acid (LPA)-induced protein kinase D (PKD) activation, we tested the effect of 
LPA on PKD activity in murine embryonic cell lines deficient in Galpha(q/11) 
(Galpha(q/11) KO cells) or Galpha(12/13) (Galpha(12/13) KO cells) and used cells 
lacking rhodopsin kinase (RK cells) as a control. In RK and Galpha(12/13) KO 
cells, LPA induced PKD activation through a phospholipase C/protein kinase C 
pathway in a concentration-dependent fashion with maximal stimulation (6-fold 
for RK cells and 4-fold for Galpha(12/13) KO cells in autophosphorylation 
activity) achieved at 3 microm. In contrast, LPA did not induce any significant 
increase in PKD activity in Galpha(q/11) KO cells. However, LPA induced a 
significantly increased PKD activity when Galpha(q/11) KO cells were transfected 
with Galpha(q). LPA-induced PKD activation was modestly attenuated by prior 
exposure of RK cells to pertussis toxin (PTx) but abolished by the combination 
treatments of PTx and Clostridium difficile toxin B. Surprisingly, PTx alone 
strikingly inhibited LPA-induced PKD activation in a concentration-dependent 
fashion in Galpha(12/13) KO cells. Similar results were obtained when activation 
loop phosphorylation at Ser-744 was determined using an antibody that detects 
the phosphorylated state of this residue. Our results indicate that G(q) is 
necessary but not sufficient to mediate LPA-induced PKD activation. In addition 
to G(q), LPA requires additional G-protein pathways to elicit a maximal response 
with G(i) playing a critical role in Galpha(12/13) KO cells. We conclude that 
LPA induces PKD activation through G(q), G(i), and G(12) and propose that PKD 
activation is a point of convergence in the action of multiple G-protein 
pathways.
