In human medicine, Clostridium (C.) difficile is since many years a well-known 
cause of nosocomial diarrhea induced by antibiotic treatment. In horses, C. 
difficile was recently suggested as a possible enteric pathogen. The bacterium 
is associated with acute colitis in mature horses following treatment with 
antibiotics. C. difficile, and/or its cytotoxin, is also associated with acute 
colitis in mares when their foals are being treated with erythromycin and 
rifampicin for Rhodococcus equi pneumonia. The colitis can have resulted from an 
accidental ingestion of erythromycin by the mares. In an experimental study it 
was also demonstrated in mature horses that erythromycin can induce severe 
colitis associated with proliferation of C. difficile. A new interesting finding 
was that in healthy foals younger than 14 days, C. difficile was isolated from 
every third foal whereas older foals proved negative. In this paper the current 
state of knowledge of C. difficile infections in animals, especially in horses, 
is reviewed. A short description is given of the historical background of 
Clostridium difficile and the antibiotic-associated colitis and diarrhea caused 
by infection with this bacterium. The taxonomy of Clostridium difficile is 
described extensively. A summary is given of the diseases associated with 
clostridia infections in animals. Special attention is paid to the pathogenesis, 
epidemiology, clinical symptoms, laboratory diagnosis, and pathology of 
Clostridium difficile infections in horses. Finally, some other bacterial causes 
of colitis in horses are discussed shortly.
