Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin is the prototype of the binary 
actin-ADP-ribosylating toxins and consists of the binding component C2II and the 
enzyme component C2I. The activated binding component C2IIa forms heptamers, 
which bind to carbohydrates on the cell surface and interact with the enzyme 
component C2I. This toxin complex is taken up by receptor-mediated endocytosis. 
In acidic endosomes, heptameric C2IIa forms pores and mediates the translocation 
of C2I into the cytosol. We report that the heat shock protein (Hsp) 90-specific 
inhibitors, geldanamycin or radicicol, block intoxication of Vero cells, rat 
astrocytes, and HeLa cells by C2 toxin. ADP-ribosylation of actin in the cytosol 
of toxin-treated cells revealed that less active C2I was translocated into the 
cytosol after treatment with Hsp90 inhibitors. Under control conditions, C2I was 
localized in the cytosol of toxin-treated rat astrocytes, whereas geldanamycin 
blocked the cytosolic distribution of C2I. At low extracellular pH (pH 4.5), 
which allows the direct translocation of C2I via C2IIa heptamers across the cell 
membrane into the cytosol, Hsp90 inhibitors retarded intoxication by C2I. 
Geldanamycin did not affect toxin binding, endocytosis, and pore formation by 
C2IIa. The ADP-ribosyltransferase activity of C2I was not affected by Hsp90 
inhibitors in vitro. The cytotoxic actions of the actin-ADP-ribosylating 
Clostridium perfringens iota toxin and the Rho-ADP-ribosylating C2-C3 fusion 
toxin was similarly blocked by Hsp90 inhibitors. In contrast, radicicol and 
geldanamycin had no effect on anthrax lethal toxin-induced cytotoxicity of 
J774-A1 macrophage-like cells or on cytotoxic effects of the glucosylating 
Clostridium difficile toxin B in Vero cells. The data indicate that Hsp90 is 
essential for the membrane translocation of ADP-ribosylating toxins delivered by 
C2II.
