AIM: Stress and Clostridium difficile toxin A increase epithelial permeability 
in the small intestine via vagus and visceral afferents, in turn activating 
mucosal mast cells. Bile acids also increase epithelial permeability but it is 
not known if nerves or mast cells are involved in this effect in the small 
intestine.
METHOD: In jejunum of anesthetized rats, the effects of hexamethonium and 
atropine on deoxycholic acid (DCA) induced fluid secretion and increase in 
epithelial permeability was therefore studied by determining the appearance and 
disappearance rates of 14C-mannitol and 51Cr-EDTA into and from a perfusion 
system containing 4 or 8 mm DCA and expressed as clearance.
RESULTS: DCA increased net fluid transport and appearance and to a less extent 
disappearance rates of the probes. Hexamethonium but not atropine, chronic 
denervation or the NO synthase inhibitor L-NNA did significantly decrease the 
appearance rate and net fluid secretion. The levels of the mast cell protease II 
(RMCP II) in perfusate and plasma were not increased by DCA. The clearance ratio 
Cr-EDTA/mannitol indicates that the plasma clearance of the permeability probes 
is partly secondary to net fluid transport only at higher DCA concentrations.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the DCA effect on epithelial permeability is to a 
large part induced by intramural reflex(es) containing nicotinic receptors. The 
results also suggest that mast cell degranulation and NO release are not 
involved in the mechanism. This indicates that the nerve effect on intestinal 
paracellular permeability is not mediated by the mechanisms described for stress 
or Clostridium difficile toxin A.
