BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridium difficile causes antibiotic-associated diarrhea 
and pseudomembranous colitis, diseases afflicting millions of people each year. 
Although C. difficile releases 2 structurally similar exotoxins, toxin A and 
toxin B, animal experiments suggest that only toxin A mediates diarrhea and 
enterocolitis. However, toxin A-negative/toxin B-positive strains of C. 
difficile recently were isolated from patients with antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea and colitis, indicating that toxin B also may be pathogenic in humans.
METHODS: Here we used subcutaneously transplanted human intestinal xenografts in 
immunodeficient mice to generate a chimeric animal model for C. difficile 
toxin-induced pathology of human intestine.
RESULTS: We found that intraluminal toxin B, like equivalent concentrations of 
toxin A, induced intestinal epithelial cell damage, increased mucosal 
permeability, stimulated interleukin (IL)-8 synthesis, and caused an acute 
inflammatory response characterized by neutrophil recruitment and tissue damage. 
Laser capture microdissection and real-time quantitative reverse-transcription 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) showed that intestinal epithelial 
cell-specific IL-8 gene expression also was increased significantly after 
luminal exposure to C. difficile toxins in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that C. difficile toxin B, like toxin A, is a potent 
inflammatory enterotoxin for human intestine. Future therapeutic or vaccine 
strategies for C. difficile infection therefore need to target both toxins.
