Ten healthy ponies from a single herd were found by repeated fecal culture to be 
free of Salmonella species and Clostridium cadaveris. In a preliminary study, 
four ponies administered a single oral dose of 10 mg/kg lincomycin did not 
develop idiopathic colitis when the drug was administered alone. Four other 
ponies were administered 10 mg/kg lincomycin by stomach tube together with 0.45 
L of colonic content from a horse with idiopathic colitis induced earlier by 
lincomycin alone. Two of the four ponies were treated with 25 g oral zinc 
bacitracin premix (110 g/kg active ingredient) 24 h later. Forty-two hours after 
inoculation the two untreated ponies had severe signs of idiopathic colitis and 
were euthanized. Postmortem findings were typical of idiopathic colitis. The two 
treated ponies had milder illness but the more severely affected was also 
euthanized; the other was retreated at 42 h with bacitracin pre-mix and again 12 
h later. Its illness and diarrhea resolved over the next 24 h. Clostridium 
cadaveris was isolated in large numbers from the cecum of the euthanized ponies 
and their cecal content contained mouse lethal and guinea pig dermonecrotic, but 
not cytotoxic, activity. Enterotoxins of Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium 
difficile could not be demonstrated. No toxin could be demonstrated in culture 
supernatants of C. cadaveris or in supernatants of cecal contents treated with 
ethanol prior to culturing in anaerobically incubated broth. No Salmonella spp. 
were isolated. A further two ponies were administered 10 mg/kg lincomycin orally 
with 0.45 L colonic content from a horse with idiopathic colitis, as 
described.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
