The receptor binding domains of the most potent mucosal adjuvants, bacterial 
toxins and plant lectins, are organized in repeat units to recognize specific 
sugar residues. The lectin-like structure of the C-terminal region of 
Clostridium difficile toxin A prompted us to investigate the mucosal adjuvant 
properties of a nontoxigenic peptide corresponding to amino acids 2394 to 2706 
(TxA(C314)). We compared TxA(C314) adjuvant activity to those of cholera toxin 
(CT) and Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin subunit B (EtxB) 
coadministered orally or nasotracheally with poor peptide antigens (keyhole 
limpet hemocyanin [KLH] and hen egg lysozyme [HEL]). Levels of anti-KLH-specific 
serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) and IgA as well as that of mucosal IgA were 
significantly higher in animals immunized orally with TxA(C314) plus KLH than 
with KLH alone, CT plus KLH, or EtxB plus KLH. Following intranasal immunization 
with TxA(C314) plus HEL, levels of serum- and mucosa-specific antibodies were 
comparable to those induced by coadministering HEL with CT or EtxB. The 
TxA(C314) adjuvant effect following oral, but not intranasal, immunization was 
dose dependent. The analysis of the subclasses of anti-KLH-specific IgG isotypes 
and the cytokines released from splenocytes of immunized mice challenged in 
vitro with KLH indicates the induction of a mixed Th1/Th2-type immune response, 
with prevalence of the Th1 branch. We conclude that TxA(C314) enhances immune 
responses against mucosa-coadministered foreign antigens and represents a 
promising mucosal adjuvant, especially because its ability to stimulate mixed 
Th1/Th2 responses with a strong a Th1 component is extremely worthwhile against 
intracellular pathogens.
