OBJECTIVES: The H2O2 generating system of the thyrocyte and the O2- generating 
system of macrophages and leukocytes present numerous functional analogies. The 
main constituent enzymes belong to the NADPH oxidase (NOX) family (Duox/ThOX for 
the thyroid and NOX2 /gp91phox for the leukocytes and macrophages), and in both 
cell types, H2O2 generation is activated by the intracellular generation of Ca2+ 
and diacylglycerol signals. Nevertheless, although the controls involved in 
these two systems are similar, their mechanisms are different. The main factors 
controlling O2- production by NOX2 are the cytosolic proteins p67phox and 
p47phox, and Rac, a small GTP-binding protein. We have previously reported that 
there is no expression of p67phox and p47phox in thyrocytes. Here, we 
investigated whether Rac1 is an actor in the thyroid H2O2-generating system.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Ionomycin- and carbamylcholine-stimulated H2O2 generation 
was measured in dog thyroid cells pretreated with the Clostridium difficile 
toxin B, which inhibits Rac proteins. Activation of Rac1 was measured in 
response to agents stimulating H2O2 production, using the CRIB domain of PAK1 as 
a probe in a glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down assay.
RESULTS: Among the various agents inducing H2O2 generation in dog thyrocytes, 
carbamylcholine is the only one which activates Rac1, whereas phorbol ester and 
calcium increase alone have no effect, and cAMP inactivates it. Moreover, 
whereas toxin B inhibits the stimulation of O2- generation by phorbol ester in 
leukocytes, it does not inhibit H2O2 generation induced by carbamylcholine and 
ionomycin in dog thyrocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike in leukocytes, Rac proteins do not play a role in H2O2 
generation in thyroid cells. A different regulatory cascade for the control of 
H2O2 generation remains to be defined.
