Helicobacter spp. have been implicated in a variety of gastrointestinal tract 
diseases, including peptic ulcer disease, gastric cancer, and inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), in humans and animals. Although most models of IBD are 
experimentally induced, spontaneous or natural models of IBD are rare. Herein, 
we describe a long-term study of chronic, progressive lesions that develop in 
the distal portion of the large bowel of unmanipulated Syrian hamsters naturally 
infected with Helicobacter spp. Twenty-four Syrian hamsters of three age groups 
(group A, 1 month [n = 4], group B, 7-12 months [n = 12], group C, 18-24 months 
[n = 12]), underwent complete postmortem examination. Results of microbial 
isolation and polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length 
polymorphism analyses confirmed the presence of Helicobacter spp. infection in 
the distal portion of the large bowel of all animals. Additionally, confounding 
pathogens, such as Clostridium difficile, Lawsonia intracellularis, and Giardia 
spp. that can cause proliferative enteritis, were absent in the hamsters of this 
study. Histopathologic scores for inflammation (P < 0.01), hyperplasia (P < 
0.01), and dysplasia (P < 0.05) were significantly higher in the ileocecocolic 
(ICC) junction of animals in group C, relative to group A. Dysplastic lesions of 
various grades were detected in 5 of 11 hamsters in group C. Interestingly, the 
segment of the bowel that is usually colonized by Helicobacter spp. in hamsters 
had the most severe lesions. One hamster of group C developed a malignant 
fibrous histiocytoma, whereas another hamster developed a round cell sarcoma 
originating from the ICC junction. Thus, lesions in the distal portion of the 
large bowel of aging hamsters naturally colonized with Helicobacter spp. 
warrants developing the hamster as an animal model of IBD and potentially 
IBD-related cancer.
