Male Syrian hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) were used to study interactions 
between different toxin deficient strains of C. difficile. After sensitization 
with clindamycin, hamsters were intragastrically co-infected with the 
appropriate dilutions corresponding to 100, 1000 and 10,000 cells of four (toxin 
A or B-deficient) C. difficile strains (8864, P-829, W-38 and W-74). In 
addition, a group of hamsters was infected with C. difficile VPI 10463, a 
reference toxigenic strain. Colonization and mortality was observed within 48 
hours in the group of hamsters infected with the reference toxigenic strain. No 
clinical disease was observed in the groups of hamsters co-infected with the 
toxin A or B-deficient strains. Re-infection of these hamsters (co-infected with 
toxin deficient isolates) with C. difficile VPI 10463 resulted in clinical 
disease and death suggesting that these strains do not confer protection against 
infection with a toxigenic strain. Macroscopic and microscopic observations of 
the cecum of re-infected hamsters demonstrated uniformly multiple large 
hemorrhagic areas without pseudomembranes. Hamsters infected with as few as 
100-500 cells of the toxigenic strain--VPI 10463 alone demonstrated 
pseudomembranes and multiple hemorrhages. These results suggest that even though 
the toxin deficient strains did not prevent re-infection with a toxigenic strain 
of C. difficile, they may play a role in the histopathologic changes after 
re-infections in the hamster model. Further studies with a larger number of 
hamsters and C. difficile strains of various molecular profiles are required to 
better understand the interaction between these strains.
