A sudden increase in mortality occurred in a closed breeding colony of Syrian 
hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus). The colony consisted of approximately 40 
hamsters, 8 of which were affected. Four adult males died suddenly. One pregnant 
female and one weanling died after having been observed as depressed for 1 day 
and 2 weeks respectively. One weanling and one adult male were euthanized. All 
affected hamsters had signs of diarrhea. At necropsy, hemorrhagic fluid-filled 
ceca were noted in five of eight animals. Clostridium difficile cytotoxin B was 
present in high titers [10(-3) to 10(-8)] in cecal contents of six of six 
animals tested, whereas C. difficile culture yielded positive results in only 
one of six animals. Histopathologically, findings consistent with 
Clostridium-induced typhlitis including necrosis, epithelial denudation, 
vascular congestion, and hemorrhage were present in six of six ceca evaluated. 
In addition, signs of a more chronic disease process included cecal mucosal 
hyperplasia in five of six hamsters. A silver stain of cecal hyperplastic mucosa 
for intracellular organisms including Campylobacter-like organisms was negative 
in all affected hamsters. Antibiotics had not been administrated to any hamster 
in this colony, nor had the affected animals been experimentally manipulated. 
Testing for antibiotic residues in the feed was negative, and C. difficile was 
not isolated from feed, water, or feces of unaffected hamsters. Thus C. 
difficile-induced typhlitis should be included in the differential diagnosis of 
deaths in hamsters which have no clinical histories of prior antibiotic 
administration or experimental manipulation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
