Toxin A released by Clostridium difficile interacts with the single layer of 
intestinal epithelial cells that lines the host's intestinal tract and leads to 
mucosal damage and inflammation that manifests clinically as 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis. Activation of the 
transcription factor NF-kappaB in intestinal epithelial cells is important for 
regulating the expression of epithelial cell proinflammatory genes and cell 
survival. However, the role of NF-kappaB activation in the pathogenesis of C. 
difficile toxin A-induced colitis is unknown. To determine the functional 
importance in vivo of NF-kappaB activation in intestinal epithelium in the 
pathogenesis of C. difficile-induced colitis, we used mutant mice that do not 
activate the classical NF-kappaB signaling pathway in intestinal epithelial 
cells due to a conditional deficiency in those cells of the IkappaB-kinase beta 
(IKKbeta) subunit of IKK. C. difficile toxin A challenge of intestinal loops in 
intestinal epithelial cell IKKbeta-deficient mice induced a rapid and 
significant increase in intestinal epithelial apoptosis compared with littermate 
controls. This was accompanied by a significant increase in acute mucosal 
inflammation, mucosal injury, luminal fluid secretion, and bacterial 
translocation. We conclude that activation of intestinal epithelial cell 
NF-kappaB by toxin A plays an important host mucosal protective role after C. 
difficile toxin A exposure that is mediated, at least in part, through promoting 
epithelial cell survival by abrogating epithelial cell apoptosis.
