Previous results in the laboratory of the authors showed that Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae strain 905, isolated during 'cachaça' production, was able to 
colonize and survive in the gastrointestinal tract of germ-free and conventional 
mice, and to protect these animals against oral challenge with Salmonella 
enterica serotype Typhimurium or Clostridium difficile. In the present work, the 
effects of S. cerevisiae 905 on the translocation of Salm. Typhimurium 
(mesenteric lymph nodes, Peyer's patches, spleen, liver) as well as on the 
immune system (number of Küpffer cells, immunoglobulin production, clearance of 
Escherichia coli B41) were evaluated in gnotobiotic and/or conventional mice. 
The treatment with the yeast reduced significantly the translocation of Salm. 
Typhimurium to liver in gnotobiotic animals and to all the organs tested in 
conventional mice. The number of Küpffer cells per 100 hepatocytes in liver was 
significantly higher (P<0.05) in yeast mono-associated mice (52.9+/-15.7) than 
in germ-free controls (38.1+/-9.0). Probably as a consequence, clearance of E. 
coli B41 from the bloodstream was more efficient in yeast mono-associated 
animals when compared to germ-free mice. Higher levels (P<0.05) of secretory IgA 
in intestinal content and of IgA and IgM in serum were observed in yeast 
mono-associated mice when compared to germ-free group. Concluding, the 
protection against pathogenic bacteria observed in a previous study was probably 
due to a modulation of both local and systemic immunity of mice treated with S. 
cerevisiae 905.
