ADP-ribosylation of Rho(A,B,C) by the family of exoenzyme C3-like transferases 
induces reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton based on inactivation of RhoA. 
No data are available on the role of RhoB in C3-treated cells. In murine 
fibroblasts treated with the cell-permeable exoenzyme C3 from Clostridium 
limosum (C3), an increase in the level of RhoB was observed. This upregulation 
of RhoB was based on transcriptional activation, as it was responsive to 
inhibition by actinomycin D and accompanied by activation of the rhoB promoter. 
Upregulation of RhoB was not observed in cells treated with either the actin 
ADP-ribosylating C2 toxin from Clostridium botulinum or latrunculin B, 
suggesting that inactivation of Rho but not actin reorganization was required 
for the upregulation of RhoB. This notion was confirmed, as the 
Rho/Rac/Cdc42-glucosylating toxin B from Clostridium difficile (TcdB) but not 
the Rac/R-Ras-glucosylating variant toxin B from C. difficile strain 1470 
serotype F (TcdBF) induced a strong upregulation of RhoB. Upregulation of RhoB 
was further observed in response to the Rac/(H-,K-,N-,R-)Ras-glucosylating 
lethal toxin from Clostridium sordellii. The level of active, GTP-bound RhoB was 
increased in TcdB-treated cells compared to untreated cells (as determined by 
Rhotekin pull-down assay). In contrast, no active RhoB was found in C3-treated 
cells. RhoB-GTP was required for the TcdB-induced apoptosis (cytotoxic effect), 
as this effect was responsive to inhibition by C3. In conclusion, RhoB was 
upregulated by Rho-/Ras-inactivating toxins, as a consequence of the 
inactivation of either Rho(A,B,C) or (H-,K-,N-)Ras. In TcdB-treated cells, RhoB 
escaped its inactivation and was required for the cytotoxic effect.
