Carbohydrate-induced laminitis in horses is characterized by marked changes in 
the composition of the hindgut microbiota, from a predominantly Gram-negative 
population to one dominated by Gram-positive bacteria. The objective of this 
study was to monitor changes in the relative abundance of selected hindgut 
bacteria that have previously been implicated in the pathophysiology of equine 
laminitis using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Caecal cannulae were 
surgically implanted in five Standardbred horses and laminitis induced by oral 
administration of a bolus dose of oligofructose. Caecal fluid and faecal 
specimens were collected over a 48 h period at 2 to 4 h intervals 
post-oligofructose administration and subjected to FISH using probes specific 
for nine bacterial groups to determine changes in their relative abundance 
compared with total bacteria hybridizing to the generic EUBMIX probe. 
Additionally, hoof biopsies were taken over the course of the experiment at 6 h 
intervals and evaluated for histopathological changes consistent with laminitis, 
allowing changes in hindgut microbiota to be correlated with the onset of 
lesions in the foot. Of the microorganisms specifically targeted, streptococci 
of the Streptococcus bovis/equinus complex were the only bacteria that 
consistently proliferated in both caecal fluid and faeces immediately before the 
onset of histological signs of laminitis. Furthermore, lactobacilli, 
Enterobacteriaceae, Allisonella histaminiformans, enterococci, Bacteroides 
fragilis, Mitsuokella jalaludinii and Clostridium difficile did not establish 
significant populations in the hindgut before the onset of equine laminitis.
