BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridium difficile toxin A causes acute inflammation and 
fluid secretion in experimental animals and patients with C difficile infection. 
We previously reported that toxin A increased cyclooxygenase-2/prostaglandin 
E(2) (PGE(2)) expression and apoptosis in human colonocytes. Here, we assessed 
the role of secreted PGE(2) in inflammation and enterocyte apoptosis in toxin A 
enteritis.
METHODS: Effects of PGE(2) and PGE(2) blockade on toxin A-induced apoptosis of 
human colonocytes (NCM460) and of PGE(2) or toxin A on the Fas ligand (FasL) 
induction were analyzed by flow cytometry and Western blot. Functional activity 
of elevated FasL on colonocytes was assessed by coculture of colonocytes with 
Fas bearing Jurkat T cells. The involvement of PGE(2)-dependent Fas/FasL 
activation in toxin A enteritis was further assessed in either scid or FasL and 
Fas deficient mice.
RESULTS: Inhibition of cyclooxygenase-2 by NS-398 and of PGE(2) using a blocking 
antibody markedly attenuated apoptosis in colonocytes exposed to toxin A. 
Enhanced expression and release of FasL followed PGE(2) or toxin A exposure in 
vivo and in vitro and also was significantly attenuated by treatment with NS-398 
and PGE(2) blocking antibody. PGE(2) acting through an EP1 receptor activated 
nuclear factor-kappaB, which induced transcription of FasL. Toxin A enteritis 
was accompanied by increased cellular infiltration, fluid secretion, and mucosal 
damage in control mice, but this response was markedly reduced in both Fas(-/-) 
and FasL(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Toxin A enteritis involves release of PGE(2), which activates the 
Fas/FasL system, causing enterocyte apoptosis and inflammation.
