The expression of the negative Regulator of G protein signaling 16 (RGS16) is 
rapidly induced in cardiomyocytes by various stimuli. To identify the promoter 
of the mouse RGS16 gene, a 1.8-kb deoxyribonucleic acid fragment 5' of the 
RGS16-coding region was subcloned into a firefly-luciferase reporter vector and 
four overlapping fragments were analyzed. The luciferase production was 
quantified in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes (NRCM). A 0.6-kb fragment that 
induced a tenfold increase in luciferase activity contained the minimal promoter 
sequence. Its activity was twofold stimulated by fetal calf serum, endothelin-1 
(ET-1), and sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), which stimuli also elevated the level 
of RGS16 protein. Stimulation of NRCM with ET-1 induced activation of the 
monomeric GTPases RhoA and Rac1, whereas S1P and the selective S1P1 receptor 
agonist SEW2871 only induced a pronounced activation of Rac1. In accordance, the 
treatment with the Rho-, Rac-, and Cdc42-inactivating Clostridium difficile 
Toxin B (TcdB) 10463 inhibited ET-1 and S1P-induced transcriptional activation. 
The ET-1-induced activation was insensitive to pertussis toxin but selectively 
suppressed by the RhoA-C-specific C2I-C3 ADP-ribosyl transferase and the ET(B) 
receptor antagonist BQ788. The S1P-induced activation was specifically inhibited 
by pertussis toxin and the Rac-inactivating TcdB 1470. All stimulated 
transcriptional activity was abolished by the negative transcription factor Yin 
Yang 1 (YY1), which binds to a consensus sequence within the minimal promoter. 
Taken together, our data show that most likely ET(B)- and S1P1-receptors induce 
RGS16 protein expression in cardiac myocytes by increasing the transcriptional 
activity of the rgs16 gene. This activation is mediated by heterotrimeric G 
proteins, Rho GTPases, and is under negative control of the transcription factor 
YY1.
