BACKGROUND & AIMS: Infection with Clostridium difficile causes nosocomial 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis. Hamsters historically have been used 
to investigate disease pathogenesis and treatment, but are not ideal models 
because of the lack of hamster-specific reagents and genetically modified 
animals, and because they develop fulminant disease. The aim of this study was 
to establish a mouse model of antibiotic-induced C. difficile-associated disease 
(CDAD) that more closely resembles human disease.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were exposed to a mixture of antibiotics (kanamycin, 
gentamicin, colistin, metronidazole, and vancomycin) for 3 days. Two days later, 
they were given injections of clindamycin and then challenged 1 day later with 
different doses of C. difficile.
RESULTS: Mice that were exposed to antibiotics and then challenged with C. 
difficile developed diarrhea and lost weight. Disease severity varied from 
fulminant to minimal in accordance with the challenge dose. Typical histologic 
features of CDAD were evident. Oral vancomycin prevented CDAD in all mice, but 
68% died from colitis after treatment was discontinued. All animals that 
survived an initial episode of CDAD showed no evidence of diarrhea or colitis 
after subsequent rechallenge with C. difficile. Different strains of C. 
difficile tested in the model showed different levels of virulence in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a mouse model of CDAD that closely represents the 
human disease. In light of the recent substantial increases in CDAD incidence 
and severity, this model will be valuable in testing new treatments, examining 
disease pathogenesis, and elucidating mechanisms of protective immunity.
