OPT-80, a novel, minimally absorbed macrocycle, is a candidate treatment option 
for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) based on cure without recurrence of 
CDI in the hamster challenge model, good in vitro activity against C. difficile, 
and relative sparing of commensal gram-negative anaerobes. In this open-label, 
dose-ranging clinical trial, 48 evaluable subjects were randomized to receive 
either 50, 100, or 200 mg of OPT-80 orally every 12 h for 10 days as treatment 
for mild to moderately severe CDI. OPT-80 was well tolerated by all subjects. 
Plasma concentrations were below the lower limit of quantitation in almost 
one-half of patients and typically <or=20 ng/ml across the dose range; the mean 
fecal concentrations exceeded the MIC at which 90% of the isolates tested are 
inhibited by 2,000- to 10,000-fold with increasing dosages. Resolution of 
diarrhea within 10 days was achieved in 10/14 patients (71%), 12/15 patients 
(80%), and 15/16 patients (94%), and the median time to resolution of diarrhea 
was reduced from 5.5 to 3.0 days with increasing dosages. Across all groups, the 
clinical cure rate, which was defined as resolution of diarrheal disease without 
the need for further treatment, was 41/45 patients (91%). Recurrence of CDI at 
approximately 1 month after treatment was observed in two (5%) patients, one 
each in the 100-mg and 400-mg groups. The apparent high clinical response, good 
tolerance, low recurrence rate, and more-complete and rapid symptom control with 
the highest dosage support the selection of the 200-mg twice-daily dose for 
further clinical development of OPT-80 for treatment of CDI.
