Toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB) are major virulence factors of Clostridium 
difficile. These two toxins intoxicate cultured cells by similar mechanisms, and 
TcdB generally is more potent than TcdA in cultured cells. The exact reason for 
this difference is unclear. Here, we report that the cellular effects of TcdA 
can be substantially enhanced via an opsonizing antibody through Fc gamma 
receptor I (FcgammaRI)-mediated endocytosis. A TcdA-specific monoclonal 
antibody, A1H3, was found to significantly enhance the cytotoxicity of TcdA to 
macrophages and monocytes. The A1H3-dependent enhancement of glucosyltransferase 
activity, cytoskeleton disruption, and tumor necrosis factor alpha production 
induced by TcdA was further demonstrated using RAW 264.7 cells. Subsequent 
experiments indicated that the interaction of FcgammaRI with A1H3 underlays the 
antibody-dependent enhancement of the cellular effects of TcdA. While blocking 
FcgammaRII and FcgammaRIII with anti-CD16/32 antibodies did not affect the 
TcdA-mediated glucosylation of Rac1 in RAW 264.7 cells, presaturation of 
FcgammaRI with anti-CD64 antibodies in THP1 cells significantly reduced this 
activity. Incubation of a TcdA-A1H3 immune complex with recombinant mouse CD64 
completely abrogated the A1H3-mediated enhancement of the glucosyltransferase 
activity of TcdA in RAW 264.7 cells. Moreover, expression of FcgammaRI in CHO 
cells strikingly enhanced the sensitivity of these cells to TcdA complexed with 
A1H3. We showed that the presence of A1H3 facilitated cell surface recruitment 
of TcdA, contributing to the antibody-dependent, FcgammaRI-mediated enhancement 
of TcdA activity. Finally, studies using chlorpromazine and endosomal 
acidification inhibitors revealed an important role of the endocytic pathway in 
the A1H3-dependent enhancement of TcdA activity.
