Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) have been associated with Clostridium difficile 
infection (CDI) in several recent studies. However, other studies have not shown 
this association, and the mechanism by which PPIs might promote CDI has not been 
elucidated. We hypothesized two possible mechanisms of causation: first, by 
raising pH, PPIs may prevent gastric contents from killing C. difficile spores; 
second, gastric contents of PPI-treated patients may promote germination and 
outgrowth of C. difficile spores. Survival rates of spores from six different 
strains of C. difficile in acidic gastric contents were assessed using 
quantitative cultures on selective media. Germination and outgrowth of spores 
were assessed by heat shock at 80 degrees C, phase-contrast microscopy, and 
ethanol shock after incubation for 24 h in the gastric contents of patients and 
in the gastric, small intestinal, and cecal contents of mice. C. difficile 
spores survived and remained dormant in nonbilious gastric contents with acidic 
pH. Germination did not occur in unmodified gastric contents of patients but did 
occur with the addition of taurocholic acid and amino acids. In mice, 
germination did not occur in gastric contents but did occur in small intestinal 
and cecal contents. In summary, C. difficile spores survived in acidic gastric 
contents and did not undergo germination and outgrowth in gastric contents, 
probably due to lack of essential germinants, such as taurocholic acid. Our 
results suggest that the effects of PPIs in the stomach do not contribute to the 
pathogenesis of CDI.
