The human gastrointestinal tract is home to hundreds of species of bacteria and 
the balance between beneficial and pathogenic bacteria plays a critical role in 
human health and disease. The human infant, however, is born with a sterile gut 
and the complex gastrointestinal host/bacterial ecosystem is only established 
after birth by rapid bacterial colonization. Composition of newborn gut flora 
depends on several factors including type of birth (Ceasarian or natural), 
manner of early feeding (breast milk or formula), and exposure to local, 
physical environment. Imbalance in normal, healthy gut flora contributes to 
several adult human diseases including inflammatory bowel (ulcerative colitis 
and Crohn's disease) and Clostridium difficile associated disease, and early 
childhood diseases such as necrotizing enterocolitis. As a first step towards 
characterization of the role of gut bacteria in human health and disease, we 
conducted an 850 MHz (1)H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy study to 
monitor changes in metabolic profiles of urine and fecal extracts of 15 mice 
following gut sterilization by the broad-spectrum antibiotic enrofloxacin (also 
known as Baytril). Ten metabolites changed in urine following enrofloxacin 
treatment including decreased acetate due to loss of microbial catabolism of 
sugars and polysaccharides, decreased trimethylamine-N-oxide due to loss of 
microbial catabolism of choline, and increased creatine and creatinine due to 
loss of microbial enzyme degradation. Eight metabolites changed in fecal 
extracts of mice treated with enrofloxacin including depletion of amino acids 
produced by microbial proteases, reduction in metabolites generated by 
lactate-utilizing bacteria, and increased urea caused by loss of microbial 
ureases.
