Clostridium difficile, a spore-forming bacterium, causes antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea. In order to produce toxins and cause disease, C. difficile spores must 
germinate and grow out as vegetative cells in the host. Although a few compounds 
capable of germinating C. difficile spores in vitro have been identified, the in 
vivo signal(s) to which the spores respond were not previously known. 
Examination of intestinal and cecal extracts from untreated and 
antibiotic-treated mice revealed that extracts from the antibiotic-treated mice 
can stimulate colony formation from spores to greater levels. Treatment of these 
extracts with cholestyramine, a bile salt binding resin, severely decreased the 
ability of the extracts to stimulate colony formation from spores. This result, 
along with the facts that the germination factor is small, heat-stable, and 
water-soluble, support the idea that bile salts stimulate germination of C. 
difficile spores in vivo. All extracts able to stimulate high level of colony 
formation from spores had a higher proportion of primary to secondary bile salts 
than extracts that could not. In addition, cecal flora from antibiotic-treated 
mice was less able to modify the germinant taurocholate relative to flora from 
untreated mice, indicating that the population of bile salt modifying bacteria 
differed between the two groups. Taken together, these data suggest that an in 
vivo-produced compound, likely bile salts, stimulates colony formation from C. 
difficile spores and that levels of this compound are influenced by the 
commensal gastrointestinal flora.
