Clostridium difficile toxin A is known to cause actin disaggregation through the 
enzymatic inactivation of intracellular Rho proteins. Based on the rapid and 
severe cell rounding of toxin A-exposed cells, we speculated that toxin A may be 
involved in post-translational modification of tubulin, leading to microtubule 
instability. In the current study, we observed that toxin A strongly reduced 
α-tubulin acetylation in human colonocytes and mouse intestine. Fractionation 
analysis demonstrated that toxin A-induced α-tubulin deacetylation yielded 
monomeric tubulin, indicating the presence of microtubule depolymerization. 
Inhibition of the glucosyltransferase activity against Rho proteins of toxin A 
by UDP-2',3'-dialdehyde significantly abrogated toxin A-induced α-tubulin 
deacetylation. In colonocytes treated with trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of 
the HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase, toxin A-induced α-tubulin deacetylation and loss 
of tight junction were completely blocked. Administration of TSA also attenuated 
proinflammatory cytokine production, mucosal damage, and epithelial cell 
apoptosis in mouse intestine exposed to toxin A. These results suggest that 
toxin A causes microtubule depolymerization by activation of HDAC6-mediated 
tubulin deacetylation. Indeed, blockage of HDAC6 by TSA markedly attenuates 
α-tubulin deacetylation, proinflammatory cytokine production, and mucosal damage 
in a toxin A-induced mouse enteritis model. Tubulin deacetylation is an 
important component of the intestinal inflammatory cascade following toxin 
A-mediated Rho inactivation in vitro and in vivo.
