Mucosal sheets of guinea pig ileum mounted in Ussing chambers were used to 
determine effects of highly purified Clostridium difficile toxin A on intestinal 
structure and barrier function in the absence of recruited neutrophils and blood 
flow. With the use of standard electrophysiological and morphological 
techniques, our results indicate that 5 micrograms/ml mucosal toxin A induces 
substantial alteration in epithelial permeability and in structure of absorptive 
cells. Transepithelial fluxes of mannitol (3.6 A) and inulin (11.5 A) increased 
20-80 min after toxin A exposure (63 +/- 13 vs. 149 +/- 14 and 2.33 +/- 0.43 vs. 
7.03 +/- 1.0 nmol.cm-2.h-1 for mannitol and inulin; controls vs. toxin exposed, 
respectively, both P less than 0.01). Toxin A exposure diminished short-circuit 
current (153 +/- 8 vs. 77 +/- 6 microA/cm2 for control and toxin exposed, 
respectively, P less than 0.001), decreased transepithelial electrical 
resistance (61.6 +/- 3 vs. 50.1 +/- 3.9 omega.cm2 for control and toxin exposed, 
respectively, P less than 0.05), increased passive permeation of Na+ (19.1 +/- 
0.9 vs. 27.4 +/- 0.9 mumol.cm-2.h-1 for control and toxin exposed, 
respectively), and induced a Cl- secretory response (net flux 3.65 +/- 3.0 vs. 
-4.62 +/- 2.6 mumol.cm-2.h-1, for control and toxin exposed, respectively, P 
less than 0.05) over the 2-h experimental time course. Toxin A-induced 
structural alterations of villus tip absorptive cells were strikingly similar to 
those induced by the actin-binding agent cytochalasin D. Specifically, cells 
displayed constricted subjunctional zones, flared microvillus brush borders, 
condensation of microfilaments in the zone of the perijunctional actomyosin 
ring, and breakdown of intercellular tight junctions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)
