Imbalance in the regulatory immune mechanisms that control intestinal cellular 
and bacterial homeostasis may lead to induction of the detrimental inflammatory 
signals characterized in humans as inflammatory bowel disease. Induction of 
proinflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-12) induced by dendritic cells (DCs) 
expressing pattern recognition receptors may skew naive T cells to T helper 1 
polarization, which is strongly implicated in mucosal autoimmunity. Recent 
studies show the ability of probiotic microbes to treat and prevent numerous 
intestinal disorders, including Clostridium difficile-induced colitis. To study 
the molecular mechanisms involved in the induction and repression of intestinal 
inflammation, the phosphoglycerol transferase gene that plays a key role in 
lipoteichoic acid (LTA) biosynthesis in Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM (NCK56) 
was deleted. The data show that the L. acidophilus LTA-negative in LTA (NCK2025) 
not only down-regulated IL-12 and TNFÎ± but also significantly enhanced IL-10 in 
DCs and controlled the regulation of costimulatory DC functions, resulting in 
their inability to induce CD4(+) T-cell activation. Moreover, treatment of mice 
with NCK2025 compared with NCK56 significantly mitigated dextran sulfate sodium 
and CD4(+)CD45RB(high)T cell-induced colitis and effectively ameliorated dextran 
sulfate sodium-established colitis through a mechanism that involves IL-10 and 
CD4(+)FoxP3(+) T regulatory cells to dampen exaggerated mucosal inflammation. 
Directed alteration of cell surface components of L. acidophilus NCFM 
establishes a potential strategy for the treatment of inflammatory intestinal 
disorders.
