Gastrointestinal survival of the bacteriocin-producing strain, Lactococcus 
lactis DPC6520, was evaluated systematically in vitro and in vivo with a view to 
using this strain to deliver biologically active lacticin 3147, a broad-spectrum 
bacteriocin, to the gut. The activity of the lacticin 3147 producer was also 
evaluated against two clinically relevant pathogens: Clostridium difficile and 
Listeria monocytogenes. When suspended in an appropriate matrix, the lactococcal 
strain is capable of surviving simulated gastrointestinal juices similar to the 
porcine probiotic, Lactobacillus salivarius DPC6005. Upon administration of L. 
lactis DPC6520 to pigs (n=4), excretion rates of ∼10(2) -10(5) CFU g(-1) faeces 
were observed by day 5. Although passage through the gastrointestinal tract 
(GIT) did not affect lacticin 3147 production by L. lactis DPC6520 isolates, 
activity was undetectable in faecal samples by an agar well diffusion assay. 
Furthermore, L. lactis DPC6520 had no inhibitory effect on C. difficile or other 
bacterial populations in a human distal colon model, while lactococcal counts 
declined 10,000-fold over 24 h. The lacticin 3147 producer failed to prevent L. 
monocytogenes infection in a mouse model, even though a mean L. lactis DPC6520 
count of 4.7 × 10(4) CFU g(-1) faeces was obtained over the 5-day administration 
period. These data demonstrate that L. lactis DPC6520 is capable of surviving 
transit through the GIT, and yet lacks antimicrobial efficacy in the models of 
infection used.

© 2011 TEAGASC Food Research Centre. FEMS Microbiology Ecology © 2011 Federation 
of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
