Clostridium difficile is a frequent cause of severe, recurrent, post-antibiotic 
diarrhoea and pseudomembranous colitis. Its pathogenicity is mediated mainly by 
two toxins, TcdA and TcdB. However, different adhesins have also been described 
as important colonization factors which are implicated in the first step of the 
intestinal infection. In this study, we focused our interest on one of these 
adhesins, fibronectin-binding protein A (FbpA), and on its role in the 
intestinal colonization process. A mutant of FbpA (CDΔFbpA) was constructed in 
C. difficile strain 630Δerm by using ClosTron technology. This mutant was 
characterized in vitro and in vivo and compared to the isogenic wild-type 
strain. Adhesion of the CDΔFbpA mutant to the human colonic epithelial cell line 
Caco-2 and to mucus-secreting HT29-MTX cells was examined. Surprisingly, the 
CDΔFbpA mutant adhered more than the wild-type parental strain. The CDΔFbpA 
mutant was also analysed in three different mouse models by following the 
intestinal implantation kinetics (faecal shedding) and caecal colonization (7 
days post-challenge). We showed that in monoxenic mice, CDΔFbpA shed C. 
difficile in faeces at the same rate as that of the isogenic wild-type strain 
but its colonization of the caecal wall was significantly reduced. In dixenic 
mice, the shedding rate was slower for the CDΔFbpA mutant than for the isogenic 
wild-type strain during the first days of infection, but no significant 
difference was observed in caecal colonization. Similar rates of intestinal 
implantation and caecal colonization were observed for both strains in assays 
performed in human microbiota-associated mice. Taken together, our data suggest 
that FbpA plays a role in intestinal colonization by C. difficile.
