OBJECTIVES: Clostridium difficile produces toxins and is an aetiological 
organism of pseudomembranous colitis. Immunoglobulin is one of the treatment 
strategies against fulminant C. difficile infections, but the clinical evidence 
is still limited. We examined the efficacy of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) 
in C. difficile toxin (CDT)-mediated lethality and cellular injury in mice.
METHODS: Mice were intraperitoneally injected with 0.2 mL of filter-sterilized 
C. difficile culture supernatant (CDT preparation). The IVIg preparation was 
intravenously administered at several timepoints. We also examined alteration of 
intestinal permeability and an apoptosis marker in the gut. In in vitro 
experiments, HEp-2 cells were incubated with a CDT preparation in the presence 
or absence of the IVIg preparation, after which cell viability and lactate 
dehydrogenase release were examined.
RESULTS: All control mice died by day 2 after injection of the CDT preparation. 
The maximum effects of IVIg (100% survival) were observed when the mice were 
treated with IVIg at the same time as injection of the CDT preparation. The IVIg 
effects were closely associated with improvement of intestinal vascular 
permeability and mucosal damage in the gut. In addition, reduction of an 
apoptosis marker (histone-associated DNA fragments) was demonstrated in the mice 
treated with IVIg. Interestingly, a smaller increase in histone-associated DNA 
fragments was observed in FasL-deficient mice treated with the CDT preparation 
compared with wild-type.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrated that IVIg may be protective against 
CDT-mediated lethality, when administered at the appropriate time. The present 
data also suggest an increase in intestinal permeability, probably through 
exaggeration of Fas/FasL-mediated apoptosis, as a key mechanism of C. 
difficile-mediated diseases.
