Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive obligate anaerobic pathogen that causes 
pseudomembranous colitis in antibiotics-treated individuals. However, host 
immune protective mechanisms against C. difficile are largely unknown. In this 
study, we show that C. difficile possesses potent stimulatory activity for 
nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 1 (Nod1), an intracellular pattern 
recognition molecule that senses bacterial peptidoglycan-related molecules. 
Nod1(-/-), but not Nod2(-/-), mice exhibited increased lethality in response to 
C. difficile intestinal infection despite comparable levels of intestinal damage 
and epithelial permeability in Nod1(-/-) and control mice. The enhanced 
lethality was accompanied by impaired C. difficile clearance, increased 
bacterial translocation, and elevated levels of endotoxin and IL-1Î² in the serum 
of Nod1(-/-) mice. Histological and flow cytometric analyses revealed that 
Nod1(-/-) mice had defective recruitment of neutrophils, but not macrophages, to 
the intestine after C. difficile infection. The reduced recruitment of 
neutrophils correlated with impaired production of CXCL1, but not CCL2, XCL1, 
and other cytokines/chemokines, in infected Nod1(-/-) mice. The influx of 
neutrophils also was reduced when C. difficile was administered i.p., suggesting 
that Nod1 directly recognizes C. difficile to induce the recruitment of 
neutrophils to the infected site. These results indicate that Nod1 regulates 
host susceptibility to C. difficile and suggest that Nod1-mediated neutrophil 
recruitment is an important immune response against the enteric pathogen.
