Clostridium difficile is a leading cause of nosocomial infection in the 
developed world. Two toxins, A and B, produced by most strains of C. difficile 
are implicated as virulence factors, yet only recently has the requirement of 
these for infection been investigated by genetic manipulation. Current vaccine 
strategies are focused mostly on parenteral delivery of toxoids. In this work, 
we have used bacterial spores (Bacillus subtilis) as a delivery vehicle to 
evaluate the carboxy-terminal repeat domains of toxins A and B as protective 
antigens. Our findings are important and show that oral immunization of the 
repeat domain of toxin A is sufficient to confer protection in a hamster model 
of infection designed to closely mimic the human course of infection. 
Importantly, neutralizing antibodies to the toxin A repeat domain were shown to 
be cross-reactive with the analogous domain of toxin B and, being of high 
avidity, provided protection against challenge with a C. difficile strain 
producing toxins A and B (A(+)B(+)). Thus, although many strains produce both 
toxins, antibodies to only toxin A can mediate protection. Animals vaccinated 
with recombinant spores were fully able to survive reinfection, a property that 
is particularly important for a disease with which patients are prone to 
relapse. We show that mucosal immunization, not parenteral delivery, is required 
to generate secretory IgA and that production of these neutralizing polymeric 
antibodies correlates with protection. This work demonstrates that an effective 
vaccine against C. difficile can be designed around two attributes, mucosal 
delivery and the repeat domain of toxin A.
