Clostridium difficile is the causative agent of primary and recurrent 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis in hospitalized patients. The disease 
is caused mainly by two exotoxins, TcdA and TcdB, produced by the bacteria. 
Recurrent C. difficile infection (CDI) constitutes one of the most significant 
clinical issues of this disease, occurs in more than 20% of patients after the 
first episode, and may be increasing in frequency. However, there is no 
well-established animal model of CDI relapse currently available for studying 
disease pathogenesis, prevention, and therapy. Here we report the establishment 
of a conventional mouse model of recurrence/relapse CDI. We found that the 
primary episode of CDI induced little or no protective antibody response against 
C. difficile toxins and mice continued shedding C. difficile spores. Antibiotic 
treatment of surviving mice induced a second episode of diarrhea, while a 
simultaneous reexposure of animals to C. difficile bacteria or spores elicited a 
full spectrum of CDI similar to that of the primary infection. Moreover, mice 
treated with immunosuppressive agents were prone to more severe and fulminant 
recurrent disease. Finally, utilizing this model, we demonstrated that 
vancomycin only delayed disease recurrence, whereas neutralizing polysera 
against both TcdA and TcdB completely protected mice against CDI relapse. In 
conclusion, we have established a mouse relapse CDI model that allows for future 
investigations of the role of the host immune response in the disease's 
pathogenesis and permits critical testing of new therapeutics targeting 
recurrent disease.
