Clostridium difficile is the etiological agent of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhoea (AAD) and pseudomembranous colitis in humans. The role of the surface 
layer proteins (SLPs) in this disease has not yet been fully explored. The aim 
of this study was to investigate a role for SLPs in the recognition of C. 
difficile and the subsequent activation of the immune system. Bone marrow 
derived dendritic cells (DCs) exposed to SLPs were assessed for production of 
inflammatory cytokines, expression of cell surface markers and their ability to 
generate T helper (Th) cell responses. DCs isolated from C3H/HeN and C3H/HeJ 
mice were used in order to examine whether SLPs are recognised by TLR4. The role 
of TLR4 in infection was examined in TLR4-deficient mice. SLPs induced 
maturation of DCs characterised by production of IL-12, TNFα and IL-10 and 
expression of MHC class II, CD40, CD80 and CD86. Furthermore, SLP-activated DCs 
generated Th cells producing IFNγ and IL-17. SLPs were unable to activate DCs 
isolated from TLR4-mutant C3H/HeJ mice and failed to induce a subsequent Th cell 
response. TLR4⁻/⁻ and Myd88⁻/⁻, but not TRIF⁻/⁻ mice were more susceptible than 
wild-type mice to C. difficile infection. Furthermore, SLPs activated NFκB, but 
not IRF3, downstream of TLR4. Our results indicate that SLPs isolated from C. 
difficile can activate innate and adaptive immunity and that these effects are 
mediated by TLR4, with TLR4 having a functional role in experimental C. 
difficile infection. This suggests an important role for SLPs in the recognition 
of C. difficile by the immune system.
