Antibiotic-induced changes in the intestinal microbiota predispose mammalian 
hosts to infection with antibiotic-resistant pathogens. Clostridium difficile is 
a Gram-positive intestinal pathogen that causes colitis and diarrhea in patients 
following antibiotic treatment. Clindamycin predisposes patients to C. difficile 
colitis. Here, we have used Roche-454 16S rRNA gene pyrosequencing to 
longitudinally characterize the intestinal microbiota of mice following 
clindamycin treatment in the presence or absence of C. difficile infection. We 
show that a single dose of clindamycin markedly reduces the diversity of the 
intestinal microbiota for at least 28 days, with an enduring loss of ca. 90% of 
normal microbial taxa from the cecum. Loss of microbial complexity results in 
dramatic sequential expansion and contraction of a subset of bacterial taxa that 
are minor contributors to the microbial consortium prior to antibiotic 
treatment. Inoculation of clindamycin-treated mice with C. difficile (VPI 10463) 
spores results in rapid development of diarrhea and colitis, with a 4- to 5-day 
period of profound weight loss and an associated 40 to 50% mortality rate. 
Recovering mice resolve diarrhea and regain weight but remain highly infected 
with toxin-producing vegetative C. difficile bacteria and, in comparison to the 
acute stage of infection, have persistent, albeit ameliorated cecal and colonic 
inflammation. The microbiota of "recovered" mice remains highly restricted, and 
mice remain susceptible to C. difficile infection at least 10 days following 
clindamycin, suggesting that resolution of diarrhea and weight gain may result 
from the activation of mucosal immune defenses.
