BACKGROUND: Probiotics have beneficial effects in rodent models of Clostridium 
difficile (C. diffiicle)-induced colitis. The spore forming probiotic strain 
Bacillus Coagulans GBI-30, 6086 (BC30) has demonstrated anti-inflammatory and 
immune-modulating effects in vitro. Our goal was to determine if BC30 improved 
C. difficile-induced colitis in mice. Starting on study day 0, female C57BL/6 
mice were dosed by oro-gastric gavage for 15 days with vehicle (saline) or BC30 
(2 × 109 CFU per day). Mice in the C. difficile groups received an antibiotic 
mixture (study days 5 to 8 in the drinking water), and clindamycin (10 mg/kg, 
i.p., on study day 10). The C. difficile strain VPI 10463 was given by gavage at 
104 CFU to induce colitis on day 11. On day 16, stools and colons were collected 
for further analyses.
RESULTS: All mice treated with BC30 survived on study day 13, while two mice 
treated with vehicle did not survive. On day 12, a significant difference (p = 
0.0002) in the percentage of mice with normal stools (66.7%) was found in the 
BC30/C. difficile group, as compared to the vehicle/C. diffcile group (13.0%). 
On study day 16, 23.8% of mice treated with BC30 had normal stools, while this 
value was 0% with vehicle treatment (p value = 0.0187). On this day, the stool 
consistency score for the BC30/C. difficile group (1.1 ± 0.2) was significantly 
lower (p < 0.05) than for the vehicle/C. difficile cohort (1.9 ± 0.2). BC30 
modestly attenuated the colonic pathology (crypt damage, edema, leukocyte 
influx) that was present following C. difficile infection. Colonic MIP-2 
chemokine contents (pg/2 cm colon) were: 10.2 ± 0.5 (vehicle/no C. difficile), 
24.6 ± 9.5 (vehicle/C. difficile) and 16.3 ± 4.3 (BC30/C. difficle).
CONCLUSION: The probiotic BC30 improved some parameters of C. difficile-induced 
colitis in mice. BC30 prolonged the survival of C. diffiicle infected mice. 
Particularly, this probiotic improved the stool consistency of mice, in this 
infectious colitis model.
