PURPOSE OF REVIEW: There is accumulating evidence on the importance of microbes 
in the development and maintenance of both the intestinal and immune systems. 
This review focuses on the current findings on the role of gastrointestinal 
pathogens in the cause of chronic inflammatory bowel disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: A number of intestinal pathogens including Mycobacterium avium 
subspecies paratuberculosis, adherent-invasive Escherichia coli, and 
Campylobacter species are associated at fairly high prevalence with Crohn's 
disease, while two recent studies found a low prevalence for cytomegalovirus. In 
a prospective study, M. avium subspecies paratuberculosis detection in early 
Crohn's disease was low and comparable to controls, while much higher in an 
established inflammatory bowel disease cohort. In the pediatric setting, a high 
prevalence of Clostridium difficile was seen in both active and inactive Crohn's 
disease and ulcerative colitis patients. Some studies have speculated that 
Salmonella or Campylobacter infection may increase the risk of inflammatory 
bowel disease on long-term follow-up, but detection bias was found to obscure 
the risk. Recent studies in mouse models have demonstrated that a combination of 
factors, including viral pathogens, genetic susceptibility, and commensal 
microflora, can lead to intestinal pathology.
SUMMARY: No evidence for causation of inflammatory bowel disease by a single 
agent has been found, whereas a number of microbes have been strongly associated 
with the presence of disease. The majority of recent studies support a role for 
the ability of intestinal pathogens to promote chronic inflammation in 
individuals with genetic susceptibility and/or other environmental factors which 
remain to be identified. These factors may include subsets of commensal 
microflora.
