This report offers a consensus opinion on the diagnosis, epidemiology, 
treatment, and control of the primary enteropathogenic bacteria in dogs and 
cats, with an emphasis on Clostridium difficile, Clostridium perfringens, 
Campylobacter spp., Salmonella spp., and Escherichia coli associated with 
granulomatous colitis in Boxers. Veterinarians are challenged when attempting to 
diagnose animals with suspected bacterial-associated diarrhea because 
well-scrutinized practice guidelines that provide objective recommendations for 
implementing fecal testing are lacking. This problem is compounded by similar 
isolation rates for putative bacterial enteropathogens in animals with and 
without diarrhea, and by the lack of consensus among veterinary diagnostic 
laboratories as to which diagnostic assays should be utilized. Most bacterial 
enteropathogens are associated with self-limiting diarrhea, and injudicious 
administration of antimicrobials could be more harmful than beneficial. 
Salmonella and Campylobacter are well-documented zoonoses, but antimicrobial 
administration is not routinely advocated in uncomplicated cases and supportive 
therapy is recommended. Basic practices of isolation, use of appropriate 
protective equipment, and proper cleaning and disinfection are the mainstays of 
control. Handwashing with soap and water is preferred over use of alcohol-based 
hand sanitizers because spores of C. difficile and C. perfringens are 
alcohol-resistant, but susceptible to bleach (1:10 to 1:20 dilution of regular 
household bleach) and accelerated hydrogen peroxide. The implementation of 
practice guidelines in combination with the integration of validated 
molecular-based testing and conventional testing is pivotal if we are to 
optimize the identification and management of enteropathogenic bacteria in dogs 
and cats.
