Group VIA phospholipase A(2) (iPLA(2)β) in pancreatic islet β-cells participates 
in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum ATPase 
(SERCA) inhibitor-induced apoptosis, and both are attenuated by pharmacologic or 
genetic reductions in iPLA(2)β activity and amplified by iPLA(2)β 
overexpression. While exploring signaling events that occur downstream of 
iPLA(2)β activation, we found that p38 MAPK is activated by phosphorylation in 
INS-1 insulinoma cells and mouse pancreatic islets, that this increases with 
iPLA(2)β expression level, and that it is stimulated by the iPLA(2)β reaction 
product arachidonic acid. The insulin secretagogue D-glucose also stimulates 
β-cell p38 MAPK phosphorylation, and this is prevented by the iPLA(2)β inhibitor 
bromoenol lactone. Insulin secretion induced by d-glucose and forskolin is 
amplified by overexpressing iPLA(2)β in INS-1 cells and in mouse islets, and the 
p38 MAPK inhibitor PD169316 prevents both responses. The SERCA inhibitor 
thapsigargin also stimulates phosphorylation of both β-cell MAPK kinase isoforms 
and p38 MAPK, and bromoenol lactone prevents both events. Others have reported 
that iPLA(2)β products activate Rho family G-proteins that promote MAPK kinase 
activation via a mechanism inhibited by Clostridium difficile toxin B, which we 
find to inhibit thapsigargin-induced β-cell p38 MAPK phosphorylation. 
Thapsigargin-induced β-cell apoptosis and ceramide generation are also prevented 
by the p38 MAPK inhibitor PD169316. These observations indicate that p38 MAPK is 
activated downstream of iPLA(2)β in β-cells incubated with insulin secretagogues 
or thapsigargin, that this requires prior iPLA(2)β activation, and that p38 MAPK 
is involved in the β-cell functional responses of insulin secretion and 
apoptosis in which iPLA(2)β participates.
