The toxin-producing bacterium C. difficile is the leading cause of 
antibiotic-associated colitis, with an estimated 500,000 cases C. difficile 
infection (CDI) each year in the US with a cost approaching 3 billion dollars. 
Despite the significance of CDI, the pathogenesis of this infection is still 
being defined. The recent development of tractable murine models of CDI will 
help define the determinants of C. difficile pathogenesis in vivo. To determine 
if cefoperazone-treated mice could be utilized to reveal differential 
pathogenicity of C. difficile strains, 5-8 week old C57BL/6 mice were pretreated 
with a 10 d course of cefoperazone administered in the drinking water. Following 
a 2-d recovery period without antibiotics, the animals were orally challenged 
with C. difficile strains chosen to represent the potential range of virulence 
of this organism from rapidly fatal to nonpathogenic. Animals were monitored for 
loss of weight and clinical signs of colitis. At the time of harvest, C. 
difficile strains were isolated from cecal contents and the severity of colitis 
was determined by histopathologic examination of the cecum and colon. 
Cefoperazone treated mice challenged with C. difficile strains VPI 10463 and BI1 
exhibited signs of severe colitis while infection with 630 and F200 was 
subclinical. This increased clinical severity was correlated with more severe 
histopathology with significantly more edema, inflammation and epithelial damage 
encountered in the colons of animals infected with VPI 10463 and BI1. Disease 
severity also correlated with levels of C. difficile cytotoxic activity in 
intestinal tissues and elevated blood neutrophil counts. Cefoperazone treated 
mice represent a useful model of C. difficile infection that will help us better 
understand the pathogenesis and virulence of this re-emerging pathogen.
