REASONS FOR PERFORMING STUDY: The use of anti-ulcer medication in the neonatal 
intensive care unit (ICU) is common due to the concern for development of 
catastrophic gastric ulcerdisease. In man, however, the use of acid-suppressive 
medication has been shown in some studies to be a substantial riskfactorfor the 
development of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhoea (CDAD), bacteraemia 
and neonatal sepsis.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the study reported herein is to evaluate the influence 
of anti-ulcer medications on the development of diarrhoea in the neonatalfoal.
HYPOTHESIS: The use of anti-ulcer medication does not alter the incidence of 
diarrhoea in foals treated in an ICU.
METHODS: The records of 1710 foals from 6 different equine hospitals were 
examined and the use of anti-ulcer drugs was recorded. The presence of 
in-hospital acquired diarrhoea, CDAD, Clostridium perfringens-associated 
diarrhoea, neonatal sepsis and salmonellosis were documented. In addition, the 
presence of gastric ulceration, duration of hospital stay and short-term outcome 
were examined.
RESULTS: The use of anti-ulcer medications increased the odds of in-hospital 
diarrhoea by 2.0 (95% CI 1.4-2.9; P < 0.0001), relative to the use of no 
anti-ulcer medication. There was no significant association of anti-ulcer 
medication with CDAD (P = 0.3189) (OR 2.0; 95% CI 0.4-9.5). Further, results 
indicated that decreased prevalence of gastric ulceration was not associated 
with use of anti-ulcer drugs among foals in the study for which these data were 
known (P = 0.5522).
CONCLUSIONS: Use of anti-ulcer drugs increases the odds of developing diarrhoea, 
and may not reduce the incidence of gastric ulceration in hospitalised equine 
neonates.
POTENTIAL RELEVANCE: The use of anti-ulcer drugs in neonatal foals being treated 
in a hospital setting should be carefully evaluated on an individual basis to 
determine if such use is warranted.
