The global emergence of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) has contributed to 
the recent surge in severe antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colonic 
inflammation. C. difficile produces two homologous glucosylating exotoxins, TcdA 
and TcdB, both of which are pathogenic and require neutralization to prevent 
disease occurrence. However, because of their large size and complex 
multifunctional domain structures, it has been a challenge to produce native 
recombinant toxins that may serve as vaccine candidates. Here, we describe a 
novel chimeric toxin vaccine that retains major neutralizing epitopes from both 
toxins and confers complete protection against primary and recurrent CDI in 
mice. Using a nonpathogenic Bacillus megaterium expression system, we generated 
glucosyltransferase-deficient holotoxins and demonstrated their loss of 
toxicity. The atoxic holotoxins induced potent antitoxin neutralizing antibodies 
showing little cross-immunogenicity or protection between TcdA and TcdB. To 
facilitate simultaneous protection against both toxins, we generated an active 
clostridial toxin chimera by switching the receptor binding domain of TcdB with 
that of TcdA. The toxin chimera was fully cytotoxic and showed potent 
proinflammatory activities. This toxicity was essentially abolished in a 
glucosyltransferase-deficient toxin chimera, cTxAB. Parenteral immunization of 
mice or hamsters with cTxAB induced rapid and potent neutralizing antibodies 
against both toxins. Complete and long-lasting disease protection was conferred 
by cTxAB vaccinations against both laboratory and hypervirulent C. difficile 
strains. Finally, prophylactic cTxAB vaccination prevented spore-induced disease 
relapse, which constitutes one of the most significant clinical issues in CDI. 
Thus, the rational design of recombinant chimeric toxins provides a novel 
approach for protecting individuals at high risk of developing CDI.
