BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens are commonly 
associated with colitis in equids, but healthy carriers exist. Scarce 
information is available on the prevalence of Clostridium spp. in 
gastrointestinal compartments other than faeces in healthy horses, and it is 
unknown whether faecal samples are representative of proximal compartments. The 
objectives were to investigate the prevalence of C. difficile and C. perfringens 
in different intestinal compartments of healthy adult horses and to determine 
whether faecal samples are representative of colonization in proximal sites and 
overall carrier status.
RESULTS: Toxigenic C. difficile was isolated from 14/135 (10.3%) samples from 
8/15 (53.3%) horses. Between zero and three sites were positive per horse, and 
multiple sites were positive in four horses. Isolates were recovered from 
duodenum, jejunum, ileum, right dorsal colon, small colon and rectum. When 
multiple compartments were positive in a single horse, two different C. 
difficile ribotypes were always present. Clostridium perfringens Type A (CPE, Î²2 
toxin gene negative) was recovered from the left ventral colon of one horse 
(0.74%, 1/135 samples). Agreement between faeces and overall C. difficile 
carrier status was good.
CONCLUSIONS: Clostridium difficile can be found in different compartments of the 
gastrointestinal tract of healthy horses, and multiple strains can be present in 
an individual horse. The prevalence of C. perfringens in healthy adult hoses was 
low, consistent with previous reports. Faecal samples were representative for 
presence of C. difficile in proximal compartments in 5/8 horses (63%) but were 
not representative for the specific strain.
