BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile mediates intestinal inflammation by releasing 
toxin A (TxA), a potent enterotoxin. Cathelicidins (Camp as gene name, LL-37 
peptide in humans and mCRAMP peptide in mice) are antibacterial peptides that 
also posses anti-inflammatory properties.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the role of cathelicidins in models of Clostridium 
difficile infection and TxA-mediated ileal inflammation and cultured human 
primary monocytes.
DESIGN: Wild-type (WT) and mCRAMP-deficient (Camp(-/-)) mice were treated with 
an antibiotic mixture and infected orally with C difficile. Some mice were 
intracolonically given mCRAMP daily for 3 days. Ileal loops were also prepared 
in WT mice and treated with either saline or TxA and incubated for 4 h, while 
some TxA-treated loops were injected with mCRAMP.
RESULTS: Intracolonic mCRAMP administration to C difficile-infected WT mice 
showed significantly reduced colonic histology damage, apoptosis, tissue 
myeloperoxidase (MPO) and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)α levels. Ileal mCRAMP 
treatment also significantly reduced histology damage, tissue apoptosis, MPO and 
TNFα levels in TxA-exposed ileal loops. WT and Camp(-/-) mice exhibited similar 
intestinal responses in both models, implying that C difficile/TxA-induced 
endogenous cathelicidin may be insufficient to modulate C difficile/TxA-mediated 
intestinal inflammation. Both LL-37 and mCRAMP also significantly reduced 
TxA-induced TNFα secretion via inhibition of NF-κB phosphorylation. Endogenous 
cathelicidin failed to control C difficile and/or toxin A-mediated inflammation 
and even intestinal cathelicidin expression was increased in humans and mice.
CONCLUSION: Exogenous cathelicidin modulates C difficile colitis by inhibiting 
TxA-associated intestinal inflammation. Cathelicidin administration may be a new 
anti-inflammatory treatment for C difficile toxin-associated disease.
