Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive obligate anaerobic pathogen that causes 
pseudomembranous colitis in antibiotic-treated individuals. Commensal bacteria 
are known to have a significant role in the intestinal accumulation of C. 
difficile after antibiotic treatment, but little is known about how they affect 
host immunity during C. difficile infection. In this article, we report that C. 
difficile infection results in translocation of commensals across the intestinal 
epithelial barrier that is critical for neutrophil recruitment through the 
induction of an IL-1β-mediated positive-feedback loop. Mice lacking ASC, an 
essential mediator of IL-1β and IL-18 processing and secretion, were highly 
susceptible to C. difficile infection. ASC(-/-) mice exhibited enhanced 
translocation of commensals to multiple organs after C. difficile infection. 
Notably, ASC(-/-) mice exhibited impaired CXCL1 production and neutrophil influx 
into intestinal tissues in response to C. difficile infection. The impairment in 
neutrophil recruitment resulted in reduced production of IL-1β and CXCL1 but not 
IL-18. Importantly, translocated commensals were required for 
ASC/Nlrp3-dependent IL-1β secretion by neutrophils. Mice lacking IL-1β were 
deficient in inducing CXCL1 secretion, suggesting that IL-1β is the dominant 
inducer of ASC-mediated CXCL1 production during C. difficile infection. These 
results indicate that translocated commensals play a crucial role in 
CXCL1-dependent recruitment of neutrophils to the intestine through an 
IL-1β/NLRP3/ASC-mediated positive-feedback mechanism that is important for host 
survival and clearance of translocated commensals during C. difficile infection.
