Antibiotic treatment to treat specific infections has the potential to 
effectively target the offending microbe as well as other microbes that colonize 
sites within a host. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD) is a classic example 
resulting from disruption of host microbial communities; 20% of patients with 
AAD are likely to become colonized with Clostridium difficile. Restoration of a 
"normal" microbial community within the host using probiotic bacteria is one 
approach to circumvent AAD and C. difficile infection. The goals of this study 
were to assess the interactions between Streptococcus thermophilus, a potential 
probiotic organism and C. difficile using both in vitro and in vivo systems. 
Exposure of C. difficile to filtered supernatants from S. thermophilus showed a 
dose-dependent, bactericidal effect due to lactic acid. Additional studies show 
that levels of lactic acid (10 mM) that did not inhibit bacterial growth had the 
potential to decrease tcdA expression and TcdA release into the extracellular 
milieu. In vivo, treatment with viable S. thermophilus significantly increased 
luminal levels of lactate in the cecum compared with UV-irradiated S. 
thermophilus. In the context of infection with C. difficile, mice treated with 
viable S. thermophilus exhibited 46% less weight loss compared with untreated 
controls; moreover, less pathology, diarrhea, and lower detectable toxin levels 
in cecal contents were evident more often in S. thermophillus treated mice. A 
significant, inverse correlation (Spearman r = -0.942, p = 0.017) between the 
levels of luminal lactate and abundance of C. difficile were noted suggesting 
that lactate produced by S. thermophilus is a factor impacting the progression 
of C. difficile infection in the murine system.
