The indigenous microbial community of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract determines 
susceptibility to Clostridium difficile colonization and disease. Previous 
studies have demonstrated that antibiotic-treated mice challenged with C. 
difficile either developed rapidly lethal C. difficile infection or were stably 
colonized with mild disease. The GI microbial community of animals with mild 
disease was dominated by members of the bacterial family Lachnospiraceae, while 
the gut community in moribund animals had a predominance of Escherichia coli. We 
investigated the roles of murine Lachnospiraceae and E. coli strains in 
colonization resistance against C. difficile in germfree mice. Murine 
Lachnospiraceae and E. coli isolates were cultured from wild-type mice. The 
ability of each of these isolates to interfere with C. difficile colonization 
was tested by precolonizing germfree mice with these bacteria 4 days prior to 
experimental C. difficile challenge. Mice precolonized with a murine 
Lachnospiraceae isolate, but not those colonized with E. coli, had significantly 
decreased C. difficile colonization, lower intestinal cytotoxin levels and 
exhibited less severe clinical signs and colonic histopathology. Infection of 
germfree mice or mice precolonized with E. coli with C. difficile strain VPI 
10463 was uniformly fatal by 48 h, but only 20% mortality was seen at 2 days in 
mice precolonized with the Lachnospiraceae isolate prior to challenge with VPI 
10463. These findings confirm that a single component of the GI microbiota, a 
murine Lachnospiraceae isolate, could partially restore colonization resistance 
against C. difficile. Further study of the members within the Lachnospiraceae 
family could lead to a better understanding of mechanisms of colonization 
resistance against C. difficile and novel therapeutic approaches for the 
treatment and prevention of C. difficile infection.
