Antibiotic treatment, including vancomycin, for Clostridium difficile infection 
(CDI) has been associated with recurrence of disease in up to 25% of infected 
persons. This study investigated the effects of vancomycin on the clinical 
outcomes, intestinal histopathology, and anaerobic community during and after 
treatment in a murine model of CDI. C57BL/6 mice were challenged with C. 
difficile strain VPI 10463 after pretreatment with an antibiotic cocktail. 
Twenty-four hours after infection, mice were treated daily with vancomycin, 
nitazoxanide, fidaxomicin, or metronidazaole for 5 days. Mice were monitored for 
either 6 or 12 days postinfection. Clinical, diarrhea, and histopathology scores 
were measured. Cecal contents or stool samples were assayed for clostridial or 
Bacteroides DNA and C. difficile toxins A and B. Vancomycin treatment of 
infected mice was associated with improved clinical, diarrhea, and 
histopathology scores and survival during treatment. However, after 
discontinuation of the drug, clinical scores and histopathology were worse in 
treated mice than in untreated infected controls. At the end of the study, 62% 
of the vancomycin-treated mice succumbed to recurrence, with an overall 
mortality rate equivalent to that of the untreated infected control group. 
Fidaxomicin-treated mice had outcomes similar to those of vancomycin-treated 
mice. C. difficile predominated over Bacteroides in cecal contents of 
vancomycin-treated mice, similar to findings for untreated infected mice. 
Decreasing the duration of vancomycin treatment from 5 days to 1 day decreased 
recurrence and deaths. In conclusion, vancomycin improved clinical scores and 
histopathology acutely but was associated with poor outcome posttreatment in C. 
difficile-infected mice. Decreasing vancomycin exposure may decrease relapse and 
improve survival in CDI.
