PURPOSE: Recurrent diarrhoea after successful treatment of primary Clostridium 
difficile associated disease (CDAD) occurs due to bowel flora alterations and 
failure to mount an effective antibody response. Apart from antibiotics, risk 
factors include immunosuppressive and acid-suppressive drug administration. 
Biotherapeutics such as probiotic and epidermal growth factor (EGF) may offer 
potential effective therapy for CDAD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The effect of biotherapeutics in mounting an antibody 
response against C. difficile toxins was studied in BALB/c mice challenged with 
C. difficile after pre-treatment with ampicillin, lansoprazole or cyclosporin. 
Sera from sacrificed animals were estimated for antitoxin IgG by enzyme linked 
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Antitoxin IgG was significantly higher (P<0.05) in C. difficile 
challenged groups compared to unchallenged controls, but insignificant (P>0.05) 
in animals in which C. difficile was given after pre-treatment with cyclosporin 
compared to those without any pre-treatment, or pre-treatment with antibiotic or 
lansoprazole. In inter-subgroup comparisons also significant anomaly in 
production of antitoxin IgG was found. The antitoxin IgG levels were raised in 
animals administered C. difficile after pre-treatment with ampicillin, but lower 
in animals administered cyclosporin. High levels of antitoxin IgG were also 
found in the serum samples of animals receiving lansoprazole and C. difficile.
CONCLUSIONS: Probiotics showed their beneficial effect by boosting the immune 
response as seen by production of antitoxin IgG. Oral administration of EGF did 
not affect the immune response to C. difficile toxins as significant increase 
was not observed in the serum antitoxin IgG levels in any of the groups 
investigated.
