REASONS FOR PERFORMING STUDY: Enterocolitis caused by Clostridium difficile (C. 
difficile) is a serious, sometimes fatal, disease of neonatal foals and older 
horses. Toxins A and B (TcdA and B) produced by C. difficile are important 
virulence factors. Immunisation of mares with receptor binding domains of toxins 
may prevent or reduce the severity of C. difficile colitis in foals.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether antibodies generated in the pregnant mare to 
the binding regions of TcdA and B will neutralise TcdA and B toxicity.
METHODS: Sequences encoding the binding domains of each toxin were isolated by 
PCR amplification from C. difficile JF09, a foal isolate, and cloned and 
expressed into pET15b. Thirteen mares were immunised twice 2 weeks apart with 
200 Î¼g of each recombinant protein with Quil A 2 months prior to foaling. 
Antibodies were assayed in the sera and colostrum by ELISA and for ability to 
block the cytopathic activity of each of toxin for equine endothelial cells.
RESULTS: All mares produced strong serum antibody responses to the binding 
domain of each toxin. A high level of toxin-specific antibodies was also 
detected in colostrum and in most foal sera 2 days after suckling. Diluted sera 
and colostrum premixed with either TcdA or B had no effect on the morphology of 
equine endothelial cells. Application of the same concentration of toxins alone 
or premixed with nonimmune mare/foal serum or colostrum led to an unambiguous 
cytopathic effect that ranged from complete degradation to varying degrees of 
cell rounding.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunisation of pregnant mares with recombinant binding domains of 
TcdA and B of C. difficile resulted in the production of specific antibodies in 
serum and colostrum that blocked the cytopathic activity of toxins.
POTENTIAL RELEVANCE: Results of studies support the feasibility of a prepartum 
vaccine against C. difficile enterocolitis in foals.
