BACKGROUND: Activation of the A2A adenosine receptor (A2AAR) decreases 
production of inflammatory cytokines, prevents C. difficile toxin A-induced 
enteritis and, in combination with antibiotics, increases survival from sepsis 
in mice. We investigated whether A2AAR activation improves and A2AAR deletion 
worsens outcomes in a murine model of C. difficile (strain VPI10463) infection 
(CDI).
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were pretreated with an antibiotic cocktail prior to 
infection and then treated with vancomycin with or without an A2AAR agonist. 
A2AAR-/- and littermate wild-type (WT) mice were similarly infected, and IFNγ 
and TNFα were measured at peak of and recovery from infection.
RESULTS: Infected, untreated mice rapidly lost weight, developed diarrhea, and 
had mortality rates of 50-60%. Infected mice treated with vancomycin had less 
weight loss and diarrhea during antibiotic treatment but mortality increased to 
near 100% after discontinuation of antibiotics. Infected mice treated with both 
vancomycin and an A2AAR agonist, either ATL370 or ATL1222, had minimal weight 
loss and better long-term survival than mice treated with vancomycin alone. 
A2AAR KO mice were more susceptible than WT mice to death from CDI. Increases in 
cecal IFNγ and blood TNFα were pronounced in the absence of A2AARs.
CONCLUSION: In a murine model of CDI, vancomycin treatment resulted in reduced 
weight loss and diarrhea during acute infection, but high recurrence and 
late-onset death, with overall mortality being worse than untreated infected 
controls. The administration of vancomycin plus an A2AAR agonist reduced 
inflammation and improved survival rates, suggesting a possible benefit of A2AAR 
agonists in the management of CDI to prevent recurrent disease.
