BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic bacterium that causes 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea. It produces toxin A and toxin B (TcdB), which 
cause injury to the gut epithelium. Glutamine is a fundamental fuel for 
enterocytes, maintaining intestinal mucosal health. Alanyl-glutamine (AQ) is a 
highly soluble dipeptide derivative of glutamine. We studied whether 
administration of AQ ameliorates the effects of TcdB in the intestinal cells and 
improves the outcome of C. difficile infection in mice.
METHODS: WST-1 proliferation and cell-wounding-migration assays were assessed in 
IEC-6 cells exposed to TcdB, with or without AQ. Apoptosis and necrosis were 
assessed using Annexin V and flow cytometry. C57BL/6 mice were infected with VPI 
10463 and treated with either vancomycin, AQ, or vancomycin with AQ. Intestinal 
tissues were collected for histopathologic analysis, apoptosis staining, and 
determination of myeloperoxidase activity.
RESULTS: AQ increased proliferation in intestinal cells exposed to TcdB, 
improved migration at 24 and 48 hours, and reduced apoptosis in intestinal cells 
challenged with TcdB. Infected mice treated with vancomycin and AQ had better 
survival and histopathologic findings than mice treated with vancomycin alone.
CONCLUSIONS: AQ may reduce intestinal mucosal injury in C. difficile-infected 
mice by partially reversing the effects of TcdB on enterocyte proliferation, 
migration, and apoptosis, thereby improving survival from C. difficile 
infection.
