ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The stem bark of Mammea africana is widely 
distributed in tropical Africa and commonly used in traditional medicine. This 
study aims to identify the active compound in Mammea africana and to evaluate 
its antimicrobial and antiproliferative activity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methanol extract from the bark of the Mammea africana was 
separated by liquid-liquid extraction, followed by open column chromatography. A 
principal antimicrobial compound was purified by high performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) and its structure was elucidated by nuclear magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (NMR) and mass spectrometry (MS). The antibacterial 
activity of the purified compound was determined using the broth microdilution 
method against 7 common pathogenic bacteria. The compound was also evaluated for 
cytotoxicity by cell proliferation assay (MTS) using the mouse embryonic 
fibroblast cell line NIH 3T3 and the non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549.
RESULTS: The purified active compound was determined to be mammea A/AA and was 
found to be highly active against Campylobacter jejuni (MIC=0.5 μg/ml), 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (MIC=0.25 μg/ml), and Clostridium difficile (MIC=0.25 
μg/ml). The compound exhibited significant antiproliferative activities against 
both NIH 3T3 and A549 cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Mammea A/AA isolated from Mammea africana exerts specific inhibitory 
activity against Campylobacter jejuni, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and 
Campylobacter difficile. Mammea A/AA was also found to exhibit significant 
cytotoxicity against both cancer and normal cell lines.
