Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea 
and pseudomembranous colitis. While the role of toxins in pathogenesis has been 
extensively described, the contribution of surface determinants to intestinal 
colonization is still poorly understood. We focused our study on a novel member 
of the MSCRAMM family, named CbpA (Collagen binding protein A), for its adhesive 
properties towards collagen. We demonstrate that CbpA, which carries an 
LPXTG-like cell wall anchoring domain, is expressed on the bacterial surface of 
C. difficile and that the recombinant protein binds at high affinity to 
collagens I and V (apparent Kd in the order of 10(-9 ) M). These findings were 
validated by confocal microscopy studies showing the colocalization of the 
protein with type I and V collagen fibres produced by human fibroblasts and 
mouse intestinal tissues. However, the collagen binding activity of the 
wild-type C. difficile 630 strain was indistinguishable to the cbpA knock-out 
strain. To overcome this apparent clostridial adherence redundancy, we 
engineered a Lactococcus lactis strain for the heterologous expression of CbpA. 
When exposed on the surface of L. lactis, CbpA significantly enhances the 
ability of the bacterium to interact with collagen and to adhere to 
ECM-producing cells. The binding activity of L. lactis-CbpA strain was prevented 
by an antiserum raised against CbpA, demonstrating the specificity of the 
interaction. These results suggest that CbpA is a newsurface-exposed adhesin 
contributing to the C. difficile interaction with the host.
