Clostridium difficile is considered one of the most important causes of diarrhea 
and enterocolitis in horses. Foals and adult horses are equally susceptible to 
the infection. The highly resistant spore of C. difficile is the infectious unit 
of transmission, which occurs primarily via the fecal-oral route, with sources 
of infection including equine feces, contaminated soil, animal hospitals, and 
feces of other animals. Two major risk factors for the development of C. 
difficile associated disease (CDAD) in adult horses are hospitalization and 
antimicrobial treatment, although sporadically, cases of CDAD can occur in 
horses that have not received antimicrobials or been hospitalized. The most 
common antibiotics associated with CDAD in horses are erythromycin, 
trimethoprim/sulfonamides, Î²-lactam antimicrobials, clindamycin, rifampicin, and 
gentamicin. Clinical signs and intestinal lesions of CDAD infection are not 
specific and they cannot be used to distinguish infections by C. difficile from 
infections by other agents, such as Clostridium perfringens or Salmonella sp. 
The distribution of lesions throughout the intestinal tract seems to be 
age-dependent. Small intestine is invariably affected, and colon and cecum may 
or may not have lesions in foals<1-month old. Naturally acquired disease in 
older foals and adult horses has a more aboral distribution, affecting colon and 
sometimes cecum, but rarely the small intestine. Detection of toxin A, toxin B 
or both in intestinal contents or feces is considered the most reliable 
diagnostic criterion for CDAD in horses. Isolation of toxigenic strains of C. 
difficile from horses with intestinal disease is highly suggestive of CDAD. A 
better understanding of pathogenesis, reservoirs of infection, and vaccines and 
other methods of control is needed. Also further studies are recommended to 
investigate other possible predisposing factors and/or etiological agents of 
enteric diseases of horses.
