Toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB) of Clostridium difficile cause gross 
pathological changes (e.g., inflammation, secretion, and diarrhea) in the 
infected host, yet the molecular and cellular pathways leading to observed host 
responses are poorly understood. To address this gap, we evaluated the effects 
of single doses of TcdA and/or TcdB injected into the ceca of mice, and several 
endpoints were analyzed, including tissue pathology, neutrophil infiltration, 
epithelial-layer gene expression, chemokine levels, and blood cell counts, 2, 6, 
and 16 h after injection. In addition to confirming TcdA's gross pathological 
effects, we found that both TcdA and TcdB resulted in neutrophil infiltration. 
Bioinformatics analyses identified altered expression of genes associated with 
the metabolism of lipids, fatty acids, and detoxification; small GTPase 
activity; and immune function and inflammation. Further analysis revealed 
transient expression of several chemokines (e.g., Cxcl1 and Cxcl2). Antibody 
neutralization of CXCL1 and CXCL2 did not affect TcdA-induced local pathology or 
neutrophil infiltration, but it did decrease the peripheral blood neutrophil 
count. Additionally, low serum levels of CXCL1 and CXCL2 corresponded with 
greater survival. Although TcdA induced more pronounced transcriptional changes 
than TcdB and the upregulated chemokine expression was unique to TcdA, the 
overall transcriptional responses to TcdA and TcdB were strongly correlated, 
supporting differences primarily in timing and potency rather than differences 
in the type of intracellular host response. In addition, the transcriptional 
data revealed novel toxin effects (e.g., altered expression of GTPase-associated 
and metabolic genes) underlying observed physiological responses to C. difficile 
toxins.
