Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the leading cause of hospital and 
community-acquired antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and currently represents a 
significant health burden. Although the role and contribution of C. difficile 
toxins to disease pathogenesis is being increasingly understood, at present 
other facets of C. difficile-host interactions, in particular, bacterial-driven 
effects on host immunity remain less studied. Using an ex-vivo model of 
infection, we report that the human gastrointestinal mucosa elicits a rapid and 
significant cytokine response to C. difficile. Marked increase in IFN-γ with 
modest increase in IL-22 and IL-17A was noted. Significant increase in IL-8 
suggested potential for neutrophil influx while presence of IL-12, IL-23, IL-1β 
and IL-6 was indicative of a cytokine milieu that may modulate subsequent T cell 
immunity. Majority of C. difficile-driven effects on murine bone-marrow-derived 
dendritic cell (BMDC) activation were toxin-independent; the toxins were however 
responsible for BMDC inflammasome activation. In contrast, human 
monocyte-derived DCs (mDCs) released IL-1β even in the absence of toxins 
suggesting host-specific mediation. Infected DC-T cell crosstalk revealed the 
ability of R20291 and 630 WT strains to elicit a differential DC IL-12 family 
cytokine milieu which culminated in significantly greater Th1 immunity in 
response to R20291. Interestingly, both strains induced a similar Th17 response. 
Elicitation of mucosal IFN-γ/IL-17A and Th1/Th17 immunity to C. difficile 
indicates a central role for this dual cytokine axis in establishing 
antimicrobial immunity to CDI.
