BACKGROUND/AIMS: Stabilization of the hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1α) is 
proposed to provide a protective host-response to C. difficile intoxication. 
Here, we aimed to elucidate whether nitric oxide and/or reactive oxygen species 
produced during C. difficile toxin exposure could influence HIF-1α stability and 
initiate protection against epithelial cell damage.
METHODS/RESULTS: HIF-1α and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) proteins were 
up-regulated whereas factor-inhibiting HIF-1 (FIH-1) protein was down-regulated 
in Caco-2 epithelial cell monolayers with in vitro toxin exposure. We 
demonstrate using the biotin-switch assay that the stabilization of HIF-1α 
protein occurred via iNOS-dependent nitrosylation. Inhibition of iNOS activity 
by selective inhibitor (1400W) attenuated HIF-1α stabilization and exacerbated 
toxin-dependent disruptions in Caco-2 monolayer morphology and tight junctional 
integrity in vitro. Treatment of Caco-2 cell monolayers with N-actylcysteine 
(NAC), a scavenger of reactive oxygen species (ROS), attenuated toxin-dependent 
increases in iNOS and HIF-1α protein levels but had no effect on FIH-1 
responses. In addition, mice that were exposed to C. difficile toxin in vivo 
also demonstrated a significant increase in HIF-1α protein and nitrosylation 
levels.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data suggest that important synergistic 
actions exist between nitric oxide and ROS to stabilize HIF-1α and its innate, 
protective actions in the context of C. difficile toxin-mediated epithelial 
injury.
