Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a leading cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, a major nosocomial complication. The infective 
form of C. difficile is the spore, a dormant and resistant structure that forms 
under stress. Although spore germination is the first committed step in CDI 
onset, the temporal and spatial distribution of ingested C. difficile spores is 
not clearly understood. We recently reported that CamSA, a synthetic bile salt 
analog, inhibits C. difficile spore germination in vitro and in vivo. In this 
study, we took advantage of the anti-germination activity of bile salts to 
determine the fate of ingested C. difficile spores. We tested four different 
bile salts for efficacy in preventing CDI. Since CamSA was the only 
anti-germinant tested able to prevent signs of CDI, we characterized CamSa's in 
vitro stability, distribution, and cytotoxicity. We report that CamSA is stable 
to simulated gastrointestinal (GI) environments, but will be degraded by members 
of the natural microbiota found in a healthy gut. Our data suggest that CamSA 
will not be systemically available, but instead will be localized to the GI 
tract. Since in vitro pharmacological parameters were acceptable, CamSA was used 
to probe the mouse model of CDI. By varying the timing of CamSA dosage, we 
estimated that C. difficile spores germinated and established infection less 
than 10 hours after ingestion. We also showed that ingested C. difficile spores 
rapidly transited through the GI tract and accumulated in the colon and cecum of 
CamSA-treated mice. From there, C. difficile spores were slowly shed over a 
96-hour period. To our knowledge, this is the first report of using molecular 
probes to obtain disease progression information for C. difficile infection.
