C. difficile is a Gram-positive spore-forming anaerobic bacterium that is the 
leading cause of nosocomial diarrhea in the developed world. The pathogenesis of 
C. difficile infections (CDI) is driven by toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), 
secreted factors that trigger the release of inflammatory mediators and 
contribute to disruption of the intestinal epithelial barrier. Neutrophils play 
a key role in the inflammatory response and the induction of pseudomembranous 
colitis in CDI. TcdA and TcdB alter cytoskeletal signaling and trigger the 
release of CXCL8/IL-8, a potent neutrophil chemoattractant, from intestinal 
epithelial cells; however, little is known about the surface receptor(s) that 
mediate these events. In the current study, we sought to assess whether 
toxin-induced CXCL8/IL-8 release and barrier dysfunction are driven by the 
activation of the P2Y6 receptor following the release of UDP, a danger signal, 
from intoxicated Caco-2 cells. Caco-2 cells express a functional P2Y6 receptor 
and release measurable amounts of UDP upon exposure to TcdA/B. Toxin-induced 
CXCL8/IL-8 production and release were attenuated in the presence of a selective 
P2Y6 inhibitor (MRS2578). This was associated with inhibition of TcdA/B-induced 
activation of NFÎºB. Blockade of the P2Y6 receptor also attenuated toxin-induced 
barrier dysfunction in polarized Caco-2 cells. Lastly, pretreating mice with the 
P2Y6 receptor antagonists (MSR2578) attenuated TcdA/B-induced inflammation and 
intestinal permeability in an intrarectal toxin exposure model. Taken together 
these data outline a novel role for the P2Y6 receptor in the induction of 
CXCL8/IL-8 production and barrier dysfunction in response to C. difficile toxin 
exposure and may provide a new therapeutic target for the treatment of CDI.
