Antibiotics can play dual roles in Clostridium difficile infection (CDI); 
antibiotic treatment increases the risk of CDI, and antibiotics are used to 
treat CDI. The glycylcycline antibiotic tigecycline has broad antimicrobial 
activity, yet it is rarely associated with the development of CDI, presumably 
due to its activity against C. difficile. In this study, we investigated how 
tigecycline treatment affects the structure of the gut microbiota and 
susceptibility to CDI by treating mice with tigecycline (n = 20) or saline (n = 
8) for 10 days. A sequence analysis of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene amplicons was 
used to monitor changes in the fecal microbiota. A subset of the mice was 
followed for 5 weeks after the end of treatment. The remaining mice were 
challenged with C. difficile strain VPI 10463 spores 2 days after the 
tigecycline treatment ended. Tigecycline treatment resulted in major shifts in 
the gut microbiota, including large decreases in Bacteroidetes levels and large 
increases in Proteobacteria levels. Mice with tigecycline-altered microbial 
communities were susceptible to challenge with C. difficile spores and developed 
clinical signs of severe CDI. Five weeks after the cessation of tigecycline 
treatment, the recovery of the bacterial community was incomplete and diversity 
was lower than in the untreated controls. Antibiotics with intrinsic activity 
against C. difficile can still alter the microbiota in a way that leads to 
susceptibility to CDI after discontinuation of the drug. These results indicate 
that microbiotic dynamics are key in the development of CDI, and a better 
understanding of these dynamics may lead to better strategies to prevent and 
treat this disease.
