Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a common, debilitating infection with 
high morbidity and mortality. C. difficile causes diarrhea and intestinal 
inflammation by releasing two toxins, toxin A and toxin B. The macrolide 
antibiotic fidaxomicin was recently shown to be effective in treating CDI, and 
its beneficial effect was associated with fewer recurrent infections in CDI 
patients. Since other macrolides possess anti-inflammatory properties, we 
examined the possibility that fidaxomicin alters C. difficile toxin A-induced 
ileal inflammation in mice. The ileal loops of anesthetized mice were injected 
with fidaxomicin (5, 10, or 20 μM), and after 30 min, the loops were injected 
with purified C. difficile toxin A or phosphate-buffered saline alone. Four 
hours after toxin A administration, ileal tissues were processed for 
histological evaluation (epithelial cell damage, neutrophil infiltration, 
congestion, and edema) and cytokine measurements. C. difficile toxin A caused 
histologic damage, evidenced by increased mean histologic score and ileal 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) protein and mRNA expression. Treatment with fidaxomicin 
(20 μM) or its primary metabolite, OP-1118 (120 μM), significantly inhibited 
toxin A-mediated histologic damage and reduced the mean histology score and 
ileal IL-1β protein and mRNA expression. Both fidaxomicin and OP-1118 reduced 
toxin A-induced cell rounding in human colonic CCD-18Co fibroblasts. Treatment 
of ileal loops with vancomycin (20 μM) and metronidazole (20 μM) did not alter 
toxin A-induced histologic damage and IL-1β protein expression. In addition to 
its well known antibacterial effects against C. difficile, fidaxomicin may 
possess anti-inflammatory activity directed against the intestinal effects of C. 
difficile toxins.
