The interplay between Clostridium difficile and the host's metabolome is 
believed to influence the severity of infection. However, the mechanism for this 
phenomenon remains unclear. In this study, we model one of these metabolic 
pathways by focusing on tryptophan metabolism in the host. We found that 
inhibition of tryptophan catabolism in IDO1-knockout mice led to increased 
mucosal destruction, cecal hemorrhage, and increased production of IFN-γ in 
response to C. difficile infection, but no significant change in mucosal 
effector or regulatory T cell numbers or IL-10 mRNA expression. The increased 
immunopathology in infected IDO1-knockout mice was associated with a lower C. 
difficile burden and an increased percentage of IFN-γ-expressing neutrophils. We 
further demonstrated the ability of kynurenine to induce apoptosis in bone 
marrow-derived neutrophils, whereas the presence of tryptophan reversed this 
effect, providing a possible mechanism for the increased neutrophil accumulation 
in IDO1(-/-) mice. We conclude that C. difficile induces tryptophan catabolism 
in cecal lamina propria cells, which restricts C. difficile-associated 
immunopathology and the accumulation of IFN-γ-expressing neutrophils. This might 
represent a self-regulatory mechanism for neutrophils, via the IFN-γ-IDO1 
pathway, to restrict their own accumulation during infection. These findings 
have important clinical implications because IDO inhibitors are used to treat 
cancer in clinical trials (in patients particularly susceptible to getting C. 
difficile infection), and treatment with IDO1 inhibitors may exacerbate the 
severity of C. difficile colitis.
