Clostridium difficile-associated disease (CDAD) constitutes a large majority of 
nosocomial diarrhea cases in industrialized nations and is mediated by the 
effects of two secreted toxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB). Patients who 
develop strong antitoxin antibody responses can clear C. difficile infection and 
remain disease free. Key toxin-neutralizing epitopes have been found within the 
carboxy-terminal receptor binding domains (RBDs) of TcdA and TcdB, which has 
generated interest in developing the RBD as a viable vaccine target. While 
numerous platforms have been studied, very little data describes the potential 
of DNA vaccination against CDAD. Therefore, we created highly optimized plasmids 
encoding the RBDs from TcdA and TcdB in which any putative N-linked 
glycosylation sites were altered. Mice and nonhuman primates were immunized 
intramuscularly, followed by in vivo electroporation, and in these animal 
models, vaccination induced significant levels of both anti-RBD antibodies 
(blood and stool) and RBD-specific antibody-secreting cells. Further 
characterization revealed that sera from immunized mice and nonhuman primates 
could detect RBD protein from transfected cells, as well as neutralize purified 
toxins in an in vitro cytotoxicity assay. Mice that were immunized with plasmids 
or given nonhuman-primate sera were protected from a lethal challenge with 
purified TcdA and/or TcdB. Moreover, immunized mice were significantly protected 
when challenged with C. difficile spores from homologous (VPI 10463) and 
heterologous, epidemic (UK1) strains. These data demonstrate the robust 
immunogenicity and efficacy of a TcdA/B RBD-based DNA vaccine in preclinical 
models of acute toxin-associated and intragastric, spore-induced colonic 
disease.
