The protective effect of a multi-strain probiotic and synbiotic formulation was 
evaluated in C57BL/6 mice infected with Clostridium difficile (CD) NAP1/027. 
Antibiotic-treated mice were divided into the following four groups: Group 1, 
fed with a synbiotic formulation consisting of Lactobacillus plantarum F44, L. 
paracasei F8, Bifidobacterium breve 46, B. lactis 8:8, galacto-oligosaccharides, 
isomalto-oligosaccharides, and resistant starch; Group 2, fed with the same four 
probiotic strains as Group 1; Group 3, fed with the same prebiotic supplements 
as Group 1 for 7 days before CD infection; and Group 4 (control group) 
antibiotic treated and infected with NAP1/027 strain. Feces and cecal contents 
were collected for microbial cell viability, quantitative PCR (qPCR), toxin 
analyses and histopathology. Synbiotics- and probiotics-fed mice showed a 
significant increase in total bifidobacteria (P < 0.05). The total lactobacilli 
count was increased in Group 1. Tests for cecal toxins were negative in Group 2 
mice, whereas one sample each from Group 1 and 3 was positive. qPCR of cecal 
contents showed significant reduction in NAP1/027 DNA copies in Groups 1 and 2 
and significantly higher numbers of B. breve 46, L. plantarum F44, and L. 
paracasei F8 in Groups 1 and 2 (P < 0.05); these changes were much less 
pronounced in Groups 3 and 4. Our findings indicate that the newly developed 
synbiotic or multi-strain probiotic formulation confers protection against 
NAP1/027 infection in C57BL/6 mice. This holds promise for performing human 
studies.
