The mammalian immune system has the ability to discriminate between pathogens 
and innocuous microbes by detecting conserved molecular patterns. In addition to 
conserved microbial patterns, the mammalian immune system may recognize distinct 
pathogen-induced processes through a mechanism which is poorly understood. 
Previous studies have shown that a type III secretion system (T3SS) in Yersinia 
pseudotuberculosis leads to decreased survival of this bacterium in primary 
murine macrophages by unknown mechanisms. Here, we use colony forming unit 
assays and fluorescence microscopy to investigate how the T3SS triggers killing 
of Yersinia in macrophages. We present evidence that Yersinia outer protein E 
(YopE) delivered by the T3SS triggers intracellular killing response against 
Yersinia. YopE mimics eukaryotic GTPase activating proteins (GAPs) and 
inactivates Rho GTPases in host cells. Unlike wild-type YopE, catalytically dead 
YopER144A is impaired in restricting Yersinia intracellular survival, 
highlighting that the GAP activity of YopE is detected as a danger signal. 
Additionally, a second translocated effector, YopT, counteracts the YopE 
triggered killing effect by decreasing the translocation level of YopE and 
possibly by competing for the same pool of Rho GTPase targets. Moreover, 
inactivation of Rho GTPases by Clostridium difficile Toxin B mimics the effect 
of YopE and promotes increased killing of Yersinia in macrophages. Using a Rac 
inhibitor NSC23766 and a Rho inhibitor TAT-C3, we show that macrophages restrict 
Yersinia intracellular survival in response to Rac1 inhibition, but not Rho 
inhibition. In summary, our findings reveal that primary macrophages sense 
manipulation of Rho GTPases by Yersinia YopE and actively counteract pathogenic 
infection by restricting intracellular bacterial survival. Our results uncover a 
new mode of innate immune recognition in response to pathogenic infection.
