Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the most common infectious cause of 
healthcare-acquired diarrhoea. Outcomes of C. difficile colonization are varied, 
from asymptomatic carriage to fulminant colitis and death, due in part to the 
interplay between the pathogenic virulence factors of the bacterium and the 
counteractive immune responses of the host. Secreted toxins A and B are the 
major virulence factors of C. difficile and induce a profound inflammatory 
response by intoxicating intestinal epithelial cells causing proinflammatory 
cytokine release. Host cell necrosis, vascular permeability and neutrophil 
infiltration lead to an elevated white cell count, profuse diarrhoea and in 
severe cases, dehydration, hypoalbuminaemia and toxic megacolon. Other bacterial 
virulence factors, including surface layer proteins and flagella proteins, are 
detected by host cell surface signal molecules that trigger downstream 
cell-mediated immune pathways. Human studies have identified a role for serum 
and faecal immunoglobulin levels in protection from disease, but the recent 
development of a mouse model of CDI has enabled studies into the precise 
molecular interactions that trigger the immune response during infection. Key 
effector molecules have been identified that can drive towards a protective 
anti-inflammatory response or a damaging proinflammatory response. The 
limitations of current antimicrobial therapies for CDI have led to the 
development of both active and passive immunotherapies, none of which have, as 
yet been formally approved for CDI. However, recent advances in our 
understanding of the molecular basis of host immune protection against CDI may 
provide an exciting opportunity for novel therapeutic developments in the 
future.
