Clostridium difficile is the main cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea and 
pseudomembranous colitis in humans and animals. Its pathogenicity is primarily 
linked to the secretion of two exotoxins (TcdA and TcdB). Although great 
progress in the toxic mechanism of TcdA and TcdB has been achieved, there are 
many conflicting reports about the apoptotic mechanism. More importantly, 
apoptotic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been reported in cells treated 
with Shiga toxins-another kind of cytotoxins that can cause diarrhea and 
colitis. Herein we checked whether TcdB can induce ER stress. The results showed 
that recombinant TcdB (rTcdB) activated molecular markers of unfolded protein 
response, suggesting that rTcdB induced ER stress in CT26 cells. However, rTcdB 
did not induce the up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), a classic 
mediator of apoptotic ER stress, but it activated the precursor of cysteine 
aspartic acid-specific protease 12 (caspase-12), a controversial mediator of 
apoptotic ER stress. Besides, glucosyltransferase activity-deficient mutant 
recombinant TcdB induced ER stress, though it has no cytotoxic or cytopathic 
effect on CT26 cells. Altogether, these data demonstrated that ER stress induced 
by rTcdB is glucosyltransferase-independent, indicating that ER stress induced 
by rTcdB is non-apoptotic. This work also offers us a new insight into the 
molecular mechanism of CHOP protein expression regulation and the role of CHOP 
expression in ER stress.

Â© The Author 2014. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, 
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
