BACKGROUND: Antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) of Clostridium difficile 
is increasingly important because of the rise in resistant strains. The standard 
medium for the AST of C. difficile is supplemented Brucella agar (sBA), but we 
found that the growth of C. difficile on sBA was not optimal. Because active 
growth is critical for reliable AST, we developed a new, modified C. difficile 
(mCD) agar. C. difficile grew better on mCD agar than on sBA.
METHODS: C. difficile isolates were collected from patients with 
healthcare-associated diarrhea. sBA medium was prepared according to the CLSI 
guidelines. Homemade mCD agar containing taurocholate, L-cysteine hydrochloride, 
and 7% horse blood was used. For 171 C. difficile isolates, we compared the agar 
dilution AST results from mCD agar with those from sBA.
RESULTS: No significant differences were observed in the 50% minimal inhibitory 
concentration (MIC50) and 90% minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC90) of 
clindamycin (CLI), metronidazole (MTZ), moxifloxacin (MXF), 
piperacillin-tazobactam (PTZ), and rifaximin (RIX), but the values for 
vancomycin (VAN) were two-fold higher on mCD agar than on sBA. The MICs of CLI, 
MXF, and RIX were in 100% agreement within two-fold dilutions, but for MTZ, VAN, 
and PTZ, 13.7%, 0.6%, and 3.1% of the isolates, respectively, were outside the 
acceptable range.
CONCLUSIONS: The MIC ranges, MIC50 and MIC90, were acceptable when AST was 
performed on mCD agar. Thus, mCD agar could be used as a substitute medium for 
the AST of C. difficile.
