TcdB is one of the key virulence factors of Clostridium difficile that is 
responsible for causing serious and potentially fatal colitis. The toxin 
contains at least two enzymatic domains: an effector glucosyltransferase domain 
for inactivating host Rho GTPases and a cysteine protease domain for the 
delivery of the effector domain into host cytosol. Here, we describe a novel 
intrabody approach to examine the role of these enzymes of TcdB in cellular 
intoxication. By screening a single-domain heavy chain (V(H)H) library raised 
against TcdB, we identified two V(H)H antibodies, 7F and E3, that specifically 
inhibit TcdB cysteine protease and glucosyltransferase activities, respectively. 
Cytoplasmic expression of 7F intrabody in Vero cells inhibited TcdB 
autoprocessing and delayed cellular intoxication, whereas E3 intrabody 
completely blocked the cytopathic effects of TcdB holotoxin. These data also 
demonstrate for the first time that toxin autoprocessing occurs after cysteine 
protease and glucosyltransferase domains translocate into the cytosol of target 
cells. We further determined the role of the enzymatic activities of TcdB in in 
vivo toxicity using a sensitive systemic challenge model in mice. Consistent 
with these in vitro results, a cysteine protease noncleavable mutant, 
TcdB-L543A, delayed toxicity in mice, whereas glycosyltransferase-deficient TcdB 
demonstrated no toxicity up to 500-fold of the 50% lethal dose (LD50) when it 
was injected systemically. Thus, glucosyltransferase but not cysteine protease 
activity is critical for TcdB-mediated cytopathic effects and TcdB systemic 
toxicity, highlighting the importance of targeting toxin glucosyltransferase 
activity for future therapy.
