Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) following antibiotic therapy is a major 
public health threat. While antibiotic disruption of the indigenous microbiota 
underlies the majority of cases of CDI, the early dynamics of infection in the 
disturbed intestinal ecosystem are poorly characterized. This study defines the 
dynamics of infection with C. difficile strain VPI 10463 throughout the 
gastrointestinal (GI) tract using a murine model of infection. After inducing 
susceptibility to C. difficile colonization via antibiotic administration, we 
followed the dynamics of spore germination, colonization, sporulation, toxin 
activity, and disease progression throughout the GI tract. C. difficile spores 
were able to germinate within 6 h postchallenge, resulting in the establishment 
of vegetative bacteria in the distal GI tract. Spores and cytotoxin activity 
were detected by 24 h postchallenge, and histopathologic colitis developed by 30 
h. Within 36 h, all infected mice succumbed to infection. We correlated the 
establishment of infection with changes in the microbiota and bile acid profile 
of the small and large intestines. Antibiotic administration resulted in 
significant changes to the microbiota in the small and large intestines, as well 
as a significant shift in the abundance of primary and secondary bile acids. Ex 
vivo analysis suggested the small intestine as the site of spore germination. 
This study provides an integrated understanding of the timing and location of 
the events surrounding C. difficile colonization and identifies potential 
targets for the development of new therapeutic strategies.
