Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is principally responsible for hospital 
acquired, antibiotic-induced diarrhea and colitis and represents a significant 
financial burden on our healthcare system. Little is known about C. difficile 
proliferation requirements, and a better understanding of these parameters is 
critical for development of new therapeutic targets. In cell lines, C. difficile 
toxin B has been shown to inhibit Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 3 (NHE3) and loss of NHE3 
in mice results in an altered intestinal environment coupled with a transformed 
gut microbiota composition. However, this has yet to be established in vivo in 
humans. We hypothesize that C. difficile toxin inhibits NHE3, resulting in 
alteration of the intestinal environment and gut microbiota. Our results 
demonstrate that CDI patient biopsy specimens have decreased NHE3 expression and 
CDI stool has elevated Na(+) and is more alkaline compared with stool from 
healthy individuals. CDI stool microbiota have increased Bacteroidetes and 
Proteobacteria and decreased Firmicutes phyla compared with healthy subjects. In 
vitro, C. difficile grows optimally in the presence of elevated Na(+) and 
alkaline pH, conditions that correlate to changes observed in CDI patients. To 
confirm that inhibition of NHE3 was specific to C. difficile, human intestinal 
organoids (HIOs) were injected with C. difficile or healthy and CDI stool 
supernatant. Injection of C. difficile and CDI stool decreased NHE3 mRNA and 
protein expression compared with healthy stool and control HIOs. Together these 
data demonstrate that C. difficile inhibits NHE3 in vivo, which creates an 
altered environment favored by C. difficile.
