BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile toxins A and B (TcdA and TcdB), considered to 
be essential for C. difficile infection, affect the morphology of several cell 
types with different potencies and timing. However, morphological changes over 
various time scales are poorly characterized. The toxins' glucosyltransferase 
domains are critical to their deleterious effects, and cell responses to 
glucosyltransferase-independent activities are incompletely understood. By 
tracking morphological changes of multiple cell types to C. difficile toxins 
with high temporal resolution, cellular responses to TcdA, TcdB, and a 
glucosyltransferase-deficient TcdB (gdTcdB) are elucidated.
RESULTS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells, J774 macrophage-like cells, and 
four epithelial cell lines (HCT8, T84, CHO, and immortalized mouse cecal 
epithelial cells) were treated with TcdA, TcdB, gdTcdB. Impedance across cell 
cultures was measured to track changes in cell morphology. Metrics from 
impedance data, developed to quantify rapid and long-lasting responses, produced 
standard curves with wide dynamic ranges that defined cell line sensitivities. 
Except for T84 cells, all cell lines were most sensitive to TcdB. J774 
macrophages stretched and increased in size in response to TcdA and TcdB but not 
gdTcdB. High concentrations of TcdB and gdTcdB (>10Â ng/ml) greatly reduced 
macrophage viability. In HCT8 cells, gdTcdB did not induce a rapid cytopathic 
effect, yet it delayed TcdA and TcdB's rapid effects. gdTcdB did not clearly 
delay TcdA or TcdB's toxin-induced effects on macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: Epithelial and endothelial cells have similar responses to toxins 
yet differ in timing and degree. Relative potencies of TcdA and TcdB in mouse 
epithelial cells in vitro do not correlate with potencies in vivo. TcdB requires 
glucosyltransferase activity to cause macrophages to spread, but cell death from 
high TcdB concentrations is glucosyltransferase-independent. Competition 
experiments with gdTcdB in epithelial cells confirm common TcdA and TcdB 
mechanisms, yet different responses of macrophages to TcdA and TcdB suggest 
different, additional mechanisms or targets in these cells. This first-time, 
precise quantification of the response of multiple cell lines to TcdA and TcdB 
provides a comparative framework for delineating the roles of different cell 
types and toxin-host interactions.
