BACKGROUND AND AIM: Probiotics might offer an attractive alternative for 
standard antibiotic therapy to treat Clostridium difficile infections (CDI). We 
specifically selected a Bacillus amyloliquefaciens strain for its high in vitro 
antibacterial activity against C. difficile and tested its efficacy to prevent 
CDI in a mouse model.
METHODS: B. amyloliquefaciens supernatant was tested against a large collection 
of C. difficile strains using an agar well diffusion test. B. amyloliquefaciens 
was orally administered to C57BL/6 mice in which CDI was induced using C. 
difficile VPI 10463, and its effect was compared with control mice receiving no 
treatment and mice receiving Saccharomyces boulardii. Mice were followed up 
daily for signs of disease including weight loss. At necropsy, the colon was 
collected and subjected to histopathological analysis. C. difficile toxin A/B 
levels and colon weight/length and colon/body weight ratios were calculated.
RESULTS: B. amyloliquefaciens supernatant was able to inhibit the growth of all 
C. difficile strains. Results of the in vivo trial indicated a significant 
weight loss for untreated and S. boulardii-treated mice as compared to B. 
amyloliquefaciens-treated mice. C. difficile toxin A and B levels were 
significantly higher for untreated and S. boulardii-treated mice than B. 
amyloliquefaciens-treated mice. A significantly lower degree of colon damage was 
detected for B. amyloliquefaciens-treated mice as compared to untreated and S. 
boulardii-treated mice, based on histopathological analysis, colon weight/length 
and colon/body weight ratios.
CONCLUSION: Administration of B. amyloliquefaciens was successful in preventing 
CDI in a mouse model.

© 2015 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley 
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.
