Vancomycin is a preferred antibiotic for treating Clostridium difficile 
infection (CDI) and has been associated with a rate of recurrence of CDI of as 
high as 20% in treated patients. Recent studies have suggested that berberine, 
an alternative medical therapy for gastroenteritis and diarrhea, exhibits 
several beneficial effects, including induction of anti-inflammatory responses 
and restoration of the intestinal barrier function. This study investigated the 
therapeutic effects of berberine on preventing CDI relapse and restoring the gut 
microbiota in a mouse model. Berberine was administered through gavage to 
C57BL/6 mice with established CDI-induced intestinal injury and colitis. The 
disease activity index (DAI), mean relative weight, histopathology scores, and 
levels of toxins A and B in fecal samples were measured. An Illumina 
sequencing-based analysis of 16S rRNA genes was used to determine the overall 
structural change in the microbiota in the mouse ileocecum. Berberine 
administration significantly promoted the restoration of the intestinal 
microbiota by inhibiting the expansion of members of the family 
Enterobacteriaceae and counteracting the side effects of vancomycin treatment. 
Therapy consisting of vancomycin and berberine combined prevented weight loss, 
improved the DAI and the histopathology scores, and effectively decreased the 
mortality rate. Berberine prevented CDIs from relapsing and significantly 
improved survival in the mouse model of CDI. Our data indicate that a 
combination of berberine and vancomycin is more effective than vancomycin alone 
for treating CDI. One of the possible mechanisms by which berberine prevents a 
CDI relapse is through modulation of the gut microbiota. Although this 
conclusion was generated in the case of the mouse model, use of the combination 
of vancomycin and berberine and represent a novel therapeutic approach targeting 
CDI.
