Previous studies have shown bismuth subsalicylate (BSS) has antimicrobial 
properties, but few studies have addressed the mechanism of action. Furthermore, 
following BSS ingestion other bismuth salts form throughout the gastrointestinal 
tract including bismuth oxychloride (BiOCl) that also act upon enteric 
pathogens. To further understand the antimicrobial activity of bismuth in 
infectious diarrhea, the antimicrobial effect of BSS and BiOCl on Clostridium 
difficile, Salmonella, Shigella, Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli strains 
and norovirus (NoV) were measured. Bacterial enteric pathogens in pure culture 
or in human fecal material were exposed to 35mg/ml BSS or BiOCl with or without 
a vehicle suspension. BSS and BiOCl treated samples were quantified and 
visualized by transmission electron microscopy. To measure the effect on NoV, 
reduction of infectious murine NoV (MNV), a surrogate for human NoV, and Norwalk 
virus RNA levels were measured by viral plaque assay and RT-qPCR, respectively. 
BSS and BiOCl reduced bacterial growth by 3-9 logs in all strains with majority 
resulting in populations of <10 cfu/ml within 24 h. Similar results were found 
when fecal material was included. Microscopy images detected bismuth on 
bacterial membranes and within the bacterial organisms at 30 min post-treatment. 
At 8.8mg/ml BSS and BiOCl reduced infectivity of MNV significantly by 2.7 and 
2.0 log after 24 h of exposure. In addition, both BSS and BiOCl slightly reduced 
the level of Norwalk replicon-bearing cells suggesting that bismuth may inhibit 
NoV in vivo. Collectively, our results confirm and build on existing data that 
BSS has antimicrobial properties against a wide-range of diarrhea-causing 
pathogens.
