Clostridium difficile is a leading cause of death from gastrointestinal 
infections in North America. Antibiotic therapy is effective, but the high 
incidence of relapse and the rise in hypervirulent strains warrant the search 
for novel treatments. Surface layer proteins (SLPs) cover the entire C. 
difficile bacterial surface, are composed of high-molecular-weight (HMW) and 
low-molecular-weight (LMW) subunits, and mediate adherence to host cells. 
Passive and active immunization against SLPs has enhanced hamster survival, 
suggesting that antibody-mediated neutralization may be an effective therapeutic 
strategy. Here, we isolated a panel of SLP-specific single-domain antibodies 
(VHHs) using an immune llama phage display library and SLPs isolated from C. 
difficile hypervirulent strain QCD-32g58 (027 ribotype) as a target antigen. 
Binding studies revealed a number of VHHs that bound QCD-32g58 SLPs with high 
affinity (K D = 3-6 nM) and targeted epitopes located on the LMW subunit of the 
SLP. The VHHs demonstrated melting temperatures as high as 75 °C, and a few were 
resistant to the gastrointestinal protease pepsin at physiologically relevant 
concentrations. In addition, we demonstrated the binding specificity of the VHHs 
to the major C. difficile ribotypes by whole cell ELISA, where all VHHs were 
found to bind 001 and 027 ribotypes, and a subset of antibodies were found to be 
broadly cross-reactive in binding cells representative of 012, 017, 023, and 078 
ribotypes. Finally, we showed that several of the VHHs inhibited C. difficile 
QCD-32g58 motility in vitro. Targeting SLPs with VHHs may be a viable 
therapeutic approach against C. difficile-associated disease.
