When functioning properly, the intestine is one of the key interfaces between 
the human body and its environment. It is responsible for extracting nutrients 
from our food and excreting our waste products. It provides an environment for a 
host of healthful microbes and serves as a first defense against pathogenic 
ones. These processes require tight homeostatic controls, which are provided by 
the interactions of a complex mix of epithelial, stromal, neural and immune 
cells, as well as the resident microflora. This homeostasis can be disrupted by 
invasive microbes, genetic lesions, and carcinogens, resulting in diseases such 
Clostridium difficile infection, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and cancer. 
Enormous strides have been made in understanding how this important organ 
functions in health and disease using everything from cell culture systems to 
animal models to human tissue samples. This has resulted in better therapies for 
all of these diseases, but there is still significant room for improvement. In 
the United States alone, 14,000 people per year die of C. difficile, up to 1.6 
million people suffer from IBD, and more than 50,000 people die every year from 
colon cancer. Because these and other intestinal diseases arise from complex 
interactions between the different components of the gut ecosystem, we propose 
that systems approaches that address this complexity in an integrative manner 
may eventually lead to improved therapeutics that deliver lasting cures. This 
review will discuss the use of systems biology for studying intestinal diseases 
in vivo with particular emphasis on mouse models. Additionally, it will focus on 
established experimental techniques that have been used to drive this 
systems-level analysis, and emerging techniques that will push this field 
forward in the future.
