Novel mechanisms of action and new chemical scaffolds are needed to rejuvenate 
antibacterial drug discovery, and riboswitch regulators of bacterial gene 
expression are a promising class of targets for the discovery of new leads. 
Herein, we report the characterization of 
5-(3-(4-fluorophenyl)butyl)-7,8-dimethylpyrido[3,4-b]quinoxaline-1,3(2H,5H)-dione 
(5FDQD)-an analog of riboflavin that was designed to bind riboswitches that 
naturally recognize the essential coenzyme flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and 
regulate FMN and riboflavin homeostasis. In vitro, 5FDQD and FMN bind to and 
trigger the function of an FMN riboswitch with equipotent activity. MIC and 
time-kill studies demonstrated that 5FDQD has potent and rapidly bactericidal 
activity against Clostridium difficile. In C57BL/6 mice, 5FDQD completely 
prevented the onset of lethal antibiotic-induced C. difficile infection (CDI). 
Against a panel of bacteria representative of healthy bowel flora, the 
antibacterial selectivity of 5FDQD was superior to currently marketed CDI 
therapeutics, with very little activity against representative strains from the 
Bacteroides, Lactobacillus, Bifidobacterium, Actinomyces, and Prevotella genera. 
Accordingly, a single oral dose of 5FDQD caused less alteration of culturable 
cecal flora in mice than the comparators. Collectively, these data suggest that 
5FDQD or closely related analogs could potentially provide a high rate of CDI 
cure with a low likelihood of infection recurrence. Future studies will seek to 
assess the role of FMN riboswitch binding to the mechanism of 5FDQD 
antibacterial action. In aggregate, our results indicate that riboswitch-binding 
antibacterial compounds can be discovered and optimized to exhibit activity 
profiles that merit preclinical and clinical development as potential 
antibacterial therapeutic agents.
