Clostridium difficile infections are associated with the use of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics and result in an exuberant inflammatory response, leading to 
nosocomial diarrhea, colitis and even death. To better understand the dynamics 
of mucosal immunity during C. difficile infection from initiation through 
expansion to resolution, we built a computational model of the mucosal immune 
response to the bacterium. The model was calibrated using data from a mouse 
model of C. difficile infection. The model demonstrates a crucial role of T 
helper 17 (Th17) effector responses in the colonic lamina propria and luminal 
commensal bacteria populations in the clearance of C. difficile and colonic 
pathology, whereas regulatory T (Treg) cells responses are associated with the 
recovery phase. In addition, the production of anti-microbial peptides by 
inflamed epithelial cells and activated neutrophils in response to C. difficile 
infection inhibit the re-growth of beneficial commensal bacterial species. 
Computational simulations suggest that the removal of neutrophil and epithelial 
cell derived anti-microbial inhibitions, separately and together, on commensal 
bacterial regrowth promote recovery and minimize colonic inflammatory pathology. 
Simulation results predict a decrease in colonic inflammatory markers, such as 
neutrophilic influx and Th17 cells in the colonic lamina propria, and length of 
infection with accelerated commensal bacteria re-growth through altered 
anti-microbial inhibition. Computational modeling provides novel insights on the 
therapeutic value of repopulating the colonic microbiome and inducing regulatory 
mucosal immune responses during C. difficile infection. Thus, modeling mucosal 
immunity-gut microbiota interactions has the potential to guide the development 
of targeted fecal transplantation therapies in the context of precision medicine 
interventions.
