Clostridium difficile is an emerging pathogen responsible for opportunistic 
infections in hospitals worldwide and is the main cause of antibiotic-associated 
pseudo-membranous colitis and diarrhea in humans. Clostridial toxins A and B 
(TcdA and TcdB) specifically bind to unknown glycoprotein(s) on the surface of 
epithelial cells in the host intestine, disrupting the intestinal barrier and 
ultimately leading to acute inflammation and diarrhea. The C-terminal 
receptor-binding domain (RBD) of TcdA, which is responsible for the initial 
binding of the toxin to host glycoproteins, has been predicted to contain 7 
potential oligosaccharide-binding sites. To study the specific roles and 
functions of these 7 putative lectin-like binding regions, a consensus sequence 
of TcdA RBD derived from different C. difficile strains deposited in the NCBI 
protein database and three truncated fragments corresponding to the N-terminal 
(residues 1-411), middle (residues 296-701), and C-terminal portions (residues 
524-911) of the RBD (F1, F2 and F3, respectively) were designed and expressed in 
Escherichia coli. In this study, the recombinant RBD (rRBD) and its truncated 
fragments were purified, characterized biologically and found to have the 
following similar properties: (a) are capable of binding to the cell surface of 
both Vero and Caco-2 cells; (b) possess Toll-like receptor agonist-like adjuvant 
activities that can activate dendritic cell maturation and increase the 
secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines; and (c) function as potent adjuvants in 
the intramuscular immunization route to enhance immune responses against weak 
immunogens. Although F1, F2 and F3 have similar repetitive amino acid sequences 
and putative oligosaccharide-binding domains, they do not possess the same 
biological and immunological properties: (i) TcdA rRBD and its fragments bind to 
the cell surface, but only TcdA rRBD and F3 internalize into Vero cells within 
15 min; (ii) the fragments exhibit various levels of hemagglutinin (HA) 
activity, with the exception of the F1 fragment, which demonstrates no HA 
activity; and (iii) in the presence of alum, all fragments elicit various levels 
of anti-toxin A-neutralizing antibody responses, but those neutralizing 
antibodies elicited by F2 did not protect mice against a TcdA challenge. Because 
TcdA rRBD, F1 and F3 formulated with alum can elicit immune protective responses 
against the cytotoxicity of TcdA, they represent potential components of future 
candidate vaccines against C. difficile-associated diseases.
