BACKGROUND: The equine faecal microbiota is very complex and remains largely 
unknown, while interspecies interactions have an important contribution to 
animal health. Clostridium difficile has been identified as an important cause 
of diarrhoea in horses. This study provides further information on the nature of 
the bacterial communities present in horses developing an episode of diarrhoea. 
The prevalence of C. difficile in hospitalised horses at the time of admission 
is also reported.
RESULTS: Bacterial diversity of the gut microbiota in diarrhoea is lower than 
that in non-diarrhoeic horses in terms of species richness (p-value <0.002) and 
in population evenness (p-value: 0.02). Statistical differences for 
Actinobacillus, Porphyromonas, RC9 group, Roseburia and Ruminococcaceae were 
revealed. Fusobacteria was found in horses with diarrhoea but not in any of the 
horses with non-diarrheic faeces. In contrast, Akkermansia was among the three 
predominant taxa in all of the horses studied. The overall prevalence of C. 
difficile in the total samples of hospitalised horses at admission was 3.7Â % 
(5/134), with five different PCR-ribotypes identified, including PCR-ribotype 
014. Two colonised horses displayed a decreased bacterial species richness 
compared to the remaining subjects studied, which shared the same Bacteroides 
genus. However, none of the positive animals had diarrhoea at the moment of 
sampling.
CONCLUSIONS: The abundance of some taxa in the faecal microbiota of diarrhoeic 
horses can be a result of microbiome dysbiosis, and therefore a cause of 
intestinal disease, or some of these taxa may act as equine enteric pathogens. 
Clostridium difficile colonisation seems to be transient in all of the horses 
studied, without overgrowth to trigger infection. A large proportion of the 
sequences were unclassified, showing the complexity of horses' faecal 
microbiota.
