Our objective was to determine the role of the inflammatory cytokine 
interleukin-23 (IL-23) in promoting neutrophil recruitment, inflammatory 
cytokine expression and intestinal histopathology in response to Clostridium 
difficile infection. Wild-type (WT) and p19(-/-) (IL-23KO) mice were pre-treated 
with cefoperazone in their drinking water for 5 days, and after a 2-day recovery 
period were challenged with spores from C. difficile strain VPI 10463. 
Interleukin-23 deficiency was associated with significant defects in both the 
recruitment of CD11b(High) Ly6G(H) (igh) neutrophils to the colon and the 
expression of neutrophil chemoattractants and stabilization factors including 
Cxcl1, Cxcl2, Ccl3 and Csf3 within the colonic mucosa as compared with WT 
animals. Furthermore, the expression of inflammatory cytokines including Il33, 
Tnf and Il6 was significantly reduced in IL-23-deficient animals. There was also 
a trend towards less severe colonic histopathology in the absence of IL-23. The 
induction of Il17a and Il22 was also significantly abrogated in IL-23KO mice. 
Inflammatory cytokine expression and neutrophilic inflammation were not reduced 
in IL-17a-deficient mice or in mice treated with anti-IL-22 depleting monoclonal 
antibody. However, induction of RegIIIg was significantly reduced in animals 
treated with anti-IL-22 antibody. Taken together, these data indicate that 
IL-23, but not IL-17a or IL-22, promotes neutrophil recruitment and inflammatory 
cytokine and chemokine expression in the colon in response to C. difficile 
infection.
