Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive spore-forming pathogen and a leading 
cause of nosocomial diarrhea. C. difficile infections are transmitted when 
ingested spores germinate in the gastrointestinal tract and transform into 
vegetative cells. Germination begins when the germinant receptor CspC detects 
bile salts in the gut. CspC is a subtilisin-like serine pseudoprotease that 
activates the related CspB serine protease through an unknown mechanism. 
Activated CspB cleaves the pro-SleC zymogen, which allows the activated SleC 
cortex hydrolase to degrade the protective cortex layer. While these regulators 
are essential for C. difficile spores to outgrow and form toxin-secreting 
vegetative cells, the mechanisms controlling their function have only been 
partially characterized. In this study, we identify the lipoprotein GerS as a 
novel regulator of C. difficile spore germination using targeted mutagenesis. A 
gerS mutant has a severe germination defect and fails to degrade cortex even 
though it processes SleC at wildtype levels. Using complementation analyses, we 
demonstrate that GerS secretion, but not lipidation, is necessary for GerS to 
activate SleC. Importantly, loss of GerS attenuates the virulence of C. 
difficile in a hamster model of infection. Since GerS appears to be conserved 
exclusively in related Peptostreptococcaeace family members, our results 
contribute to a growing body of work indicating that C. difficile has evolved 
distinct mechanisms for controlling the exit from dormancy relative to B. 
subtilis and other spore-forming organisms.
