Clostridium difficile is an opportunistic pathogen causing gut inflammation 
generally associated with an intestinal dysbiosis due to antibiotics. Several 
virulence factors have been identified as playing a key role in gut 
colonization. The surface-layer proteins, comprised of two proteins, the high 
molecular weight SlpA (HMW-SLP) and the low molecular weight SlpA (LMW-SLP), are 
the most abundant proteins on the C. difficile surface. These two proteins are 
derived from the Cwp84-mediated cleavage of a single precursor protein SlpA. In 
this study, we assessed the immunogenic properties of a recombinant SlpA 
precursor derived from a toxigenic C. difficile strain (630) and its protective 
effect as a vaccine antigen co-administered with the cholera toxin as an 
adjuvant in both hamster and mouse models. First, we confirmed the 
immunogenicity of SlpA in humans. Sera from patients with C. difficile infection 
were analyzed by ELISA. Patients with CDI have a greater number of SlpA 
antibodies than healthy patients, confirming the immunogenicity of this protein 
during the pathogenic process. Then, rectal vaccination assays were performed in 
both conventional hamsters and mice. The animals' sera were sampled before and 
after vaccination, and were analyzed by ELISA. In addition, in the mouse model, 
feces were sampled after vaccination and IgA directed against SlpA were detected 
by ELISA. In both models, the intestinal colonization was evaluated by fecal 
bacterial count after challenge. Intra-rectal vaccination with SlpA and cholera 
toxin as an adjuvant induced a local and systemic humoral immune response in 
mice and hamsters potentially responsible for the weak decrease of C. difficile 
colonization in mice and the partial protection observed in a lethal-hamster 
model.
