Secreted toxin B (TcdB) substantially contributes to the pathology observed 
during Clostridium difficile infection. To be successfully incorporated into a 
vaccine, TcdB-based immunogens must stimulate the production of neutralizing 
antibody (Ab)-encoding memory B cells (Bmem cells). Despite numerous 
investigations, a clear analysis of Bmem cellular responses following 
vaccination against TcdB is lacking. B6 mice were therefore used to test the 
ability of a nontoxigenic C-terminal domain (CTD) fragment of TcdB to induce 
Bmem cells that encode TcdB-neutralizing antibody. CTD was produced from the 
historical VPI 10463 strain (CTD1) and from the hypervirulent strain NAP1/BI/027 
(CTD2). It was then demonstrated that CTD1 induced strong recall IgG antibody 
titers, and this led to the development of functional Bmem cells that could be 
adoptively transferred to naive recipients. Bmem cell-driven neutralizing Ab 
responses conferred protection against lethal challenge with TcdB1. Further 
experiments revealed that an experimental adjuvant (Imject) and a clinical 
adjuvant (Alhydrogel) were compatible with Bmem cell induction. Reactivity of 
human Bmem cells to CTD1 was also evident in human peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells (PBMCs), suggesting that CTD1 could be a good vaccine immunogen. However, 
CTD2 induced strong Bmem cell-driven antibody titers, and the CTD2 antibody was 
neutralizing in vitro, but its protection against lethal challenge with TcdB2 
was limited to delaying time to death. Therefore, CTD from different C. 
difficile strains may be a good immunogen for stimulating B cell memory that 
encodes in vitro neutralizing Ab but may be limited by variable protection 
against intoxication in vivo.
