Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the most prevalent cause of 
health-care-associated infections. CDI-related health-care costs and deaths are 
both increasing annually on a global scale. C. difficile have been reported in 
food products in Canada, Europe, and the United States; however, the systematic 
transmission of C. difficile between humans and animals is yet to be understood. 
Because of the limitations of current therapeutic options, there is a need for 
the development of new patient treatments. Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG) is a 
major catechin compound found in green tea extracts and exhibits antioxidant and 
antimicrobial activities. This study was conducted to investigate the inhibitory 
effects of EGCG on the expression of virulence genes in C. difficile and in C. 
difficile-associated diseases by inhibition of quorum sensing. The protein 
expression of autoinducer-2 (AI-2) was evaluated by AI-2 activity. EGCG at 
various concentrations had an inhibitory effect on AI-2 production, especially 
at 10 Î¼g/mL. EGCG also significantly repressed the transcription of virulence 
genes, including luxS and tcdA, and prolonged the survival of Caenorhabditis 
elegans infected with C. difficile. Furthermore, treatment with EGCG effectively 
protected C. difficile-infected mice from C. difficile-induced death. 
Histological analysis of the colon and cecum of these mice revealed that EGCG 
protected tissues of the lower intestinal tract from damage. EGCG exerted 
growth-inhibitory and bactericidal activities on C. difficile in C. 
difficile-infected mice. Our results suggest that EGCG has significant 
antipathogenic effects on C. difficile and can be used to prevent or treat C. 
difficile-associated diseases or C. difficile infections.
