OBJECTIVE: Clostridium difficile is a major cause of nosocomial infectious 
diarrhoea. Treatment of C. difficile infection (CDI) depends on disease 
severity. A combination of vancomycin and metronidazole is often recommended in 
severe cases. The aim of this study was to examine, in a murine model of CDI, if 
mice treated with a combination of vancomycin and metronidazole had a better 
clinical outcome than mice treated with vancomycin or metronidazole alone.
DESIGN: C57BL/6J mice pretreated with an antimicrobial mixture were challenged 
with C. difficile VPI 10463 or phosphate-buffered saline by oral gavage. After 
the challenge, the mice were treated with placebo, vancomycin, metronidazole or 
a combination of vancomycin and metronidazole for 10 days. The mice were 
monitored for 20 days with weight and a clinical score. Stool samples were 
examined for C. difficile spore load and presence of C. difficile toxins.
RESULTS: None of the mice in the vancomycin-treated group died during the 
treatment phase compared to a mortality of 17%, 33% and 55% in the combination, 
metronidazole and infected control group, respectively. Mice treated with 
vancomycin alone or in combination with metronidazole recovered from CDI faster 
than mice treated with metronidazole alone. However, after discontinuation of 
treatment, vancomycin-treated and combination-treated mice succumbed to clinical 
and bacteriological relapse.
CONCLUSIONS: Mice treated with vancomycin alone had a better clinical outcome in 
the treatment phase of CDI than mice treated with metronidazole alone. A 
combination of vancomycin and metronidazole did not improve the clinical outcome 
when compared to treatment with vancomycin alone.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: The trial registration number from the Danish 
Experimental Animal Inspectorate is J number 2012-15-2934-00422.
