SYN-004 is a first in class, recombinant β-lactamase that degrades β-lactam 
antibiotics and has been formulated to be administered orally to patients 
receiving intravenous β-lactam antibiotics including cephalosporins. SYN-004 is 
intended to degrade unmetabolized antibiotics excreted into the intestines and 
thus has the potential to protect the gut microbiome from disruption by these 
antibiotics. Protection of the gut microbiome is expected to protect against 
opportunistic enteric infections such as Clostridium difficile infection as well 
as antibiotic-associated diarrhea. In order to demonstrate that oral SYN-004 is 
safe for human clinical trials, 2 Good Laboratory Practice-compliant toxicity 
studies were conducted in Beagle dogs. In both studies, SYN-004 was administered 
orally 3 times per day up to the maximum tolerated dose of the formulation. In 
the first study, doses of SYN-004 administered over 28 days were safe and well 
tolerated in dogs with the no-observed-adverse-effect level at the high dose of 
57 mg/kg/day. Systemic absorption of SYN-004 was minimal and sporadic and showed 
no accumulation during the study. In the second study, doses up to 57 mg/kg/day 
were administered to dogs in combination with an intravenous dose of ceftriaxone 
(300 mg/kg) given once per day for 14 days. Coadministration of oral SYN-004 
with intravenous ceftriaxone was safe and well tolerated, with SYN-004 having no 
noticeable effect on the plasma pharmacokinetics of ceftriaxone. These 
preclinical studies demonstrate that SYN-004 is well tolerated and, when 
coadministered with ceftriaxone, does not interfere with its systemic 
pharmacokinetics. These data supported advancing SYN-004 into human clinical 
trials.
