There is a compelling need for more effective vaccine adjuvants to augment 
induction of Ag-specific adaptive immune responses. Recent reports suggested the 
bacterial second messenger bis-(3'-5')-cyclic-dimeric-guanosine monophosphate 
(c-di-GMP) acts as an innate immune system modulator. We recently incorporated a 
Vibrio cholerae diguanylate cyclase into an adenovirus vaccine, fostering 
production of c-di-GMP as well as proinflammatory responses in mice. In this 
study, we recombined a more potent diguanylate cyclase gene, VCA0848, into a 
nonreplicating adenovirus serotype 5 (AdVCA0848) that produces elevated amounts 
of c-di-GMP when expressed in mammalian cells in vivo. This novel platform 
further improved induction of type I IFN-β and activation of innate and adaptive 
immune cells early after administration into mice as compared with control 
vectors. Coadministration of the extracellular protein OVA and the AdVCA0848 
adjuvant significantly improved OVA-specific T cell responses as detected by 
IFN-γ and IL-2 ELISPOT, while also improving OVA-specific humoral B cell 
adaptive responses. In addition, we found that coadministration of AdVCA0848 
with another adenovirus serotype 5 vector expressing the HIV-1-derived Gag Ag or 
the Clostridium difficile-derived toxin B resulted in significant inhibitory 
effects on the induction of Gag and toxin B-specific adaptive immune responses. 
As a proof of principle, these data confirm that in vivo synthesis of c-di-GMP 
stimulates strong innate immune responses that correlate with enhanced adaptive 
immune responses to concomitantly administered extracellular Ag, which can be 
used as an adjuvant to heighten effective immune responses for protein-based 
vaccine platforms against microbial infections and cancers.
