Clostridium difficile pathogenicity is related to in vivo production of toxins, 
and it is of great interest to detect toxins produced in biological samples. 
Several reports have shown that proteases in stools interfere with immunological 
methods for quantitation of toxin A. The purpose of this work was to estimate 
the relationship between the proteases and the C. difficile toxins produced in a 
gnotobiotic mouse model of pseudomembranous cecitis. Cecal proteolytic 
activities hydrolyzed toxin A, and immunoglobulin G bound to the microtiter 
plate used in immunoassays. This interference could be blocked by the addition 
of trypsin inhibitor to the samples. The ability of soluble toxin A to bind to 
bound antibodies in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was not affected by the 
proteases, but the biological activity was reduced 100-fold. The cytotoxicity of 
toxin B was not modified by proteolytic activity treatment. Mice inoculated with 
a low toxin A-producing strain of C. difficile did not died, and no modulation 
of proteolytic activities occurred. After inoculation with the lethal VPI strain 
of C. difficile, toxins A and B reached maximum levels in the ceca at 12 h 
postinfection. At this time, the proteolytic activities did not decrease from 
the levels seen at zero time. Mice died within 2 days. At this time (about 32 
postinfection), proteolytic activities were sharply decreased in the lower parts 
of the digestive tracts. The findings that serum inhibited the proteases and 
that there was a 100-fold increase in serum-derived mouse immunoglobulins in the 
lumen as the C. difficile infection progressed suggest that the decrease in 
protease activity in the lower digestive tract may be related to the exudation 
of serum from the inflammation process.
