OBJECTIVES: Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a primary cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhoeal illness. Current therapies are insufficient as 
relapse rates following antibiotic treatment range from 25% for initial 
treatment to 60% for treatment of recurrence. In this study, we looked at the 
efficacy of SQ641 in a murine model of CDI. SQ641 is an analogue of capuramycin, 
a naturally occurring nucleoside-based compound produced by Streptomyces 
griseus.
METHODS: In a series of experiments, C57BL/6 mice were treated with a cocktail 
of antibiotics and inoculated with C. difficile strain VPI10463. Animals were 
treated orally with SQ641 for 5 days at a dose range of 0.1-300 mg/kg/day, 20 
mg/kg/day vancomycin or drug vehicle. Animals were monitored for disease 
severity, clostridial shedding and faecal toxin levels for 14 days 
post-infection.
RESULTS: Five day treatment of CDI with SQ641 resulted in higher 14 day survival 
rates in mice compared with either vancomycin or vehicle alone. CDI survival 
rates were 100% (13 of 13) and 94% (32 of 34), respectively, in the 1 and 10 
mg/kg/day SQ641 treatment groups, 37% (7 of 19) with vancomycin treatment at 20 
mg/kg/day and 32% (14 of 44) in the vehicle-only control group. Secondary 
measures of efficacy, such as prevention of weight loss, decreased disease 
severity, decreased C. difficile shedding and decreased toxin in faeces, were 
observed with SQ641 and vancomycin treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: SQ641 is effective for CDI treatment with prevention of relapse in 
the murine model of CDI.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
