Clostridium difficile is an important spore-forming, opportunistic pathogen in 
animal husbandry and health care. In pig farming, only neonatal piglets are 
affected, and diarrhoea and necrotising lesions are common symptoms leading to 
dehydration and in some cases death. This study aimed at the assessment of the 
quantitative development of C. difficile colonisation in neonatal piglets by 
determining the shedding of spores and C. difficile toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB) 
concentrations in sow (n = 5-6) and piglet pen faeces (n = 5-6) at different 
time points. Spores were quantified on selective agar plates and toxins using 
ELISA method. C. difficile was not detected in the faeces of all but one sow 
during the perinatal period. Faeces of 2- and 4-day-old piglets contained 
0.65 log cells/g and 5.88 log cells/g of C. difficile, respectively. Toxins were 
detected on day 4 at a concentration of 2.13 log ng/g (TcdA) and 2.06 log ng/g 
(TcdB). On day 6, concentration of C. difficile reached 6.14 log CFU/g and 
toxins 2.02 log ng/g (TcdA) and 2.20 log ng/g (TcdB). Two-week-old piglets 
showed 4.72 log CFU/g of C. difficile but toxins could not be detected. At 21 
days of age, both C. difficile and toxins were undetectable. The concentration 
and the prevalence of C. difficile were positively associated with the 
prevalence of toxins in piglets. A very short time window for colonisation by C. 
difficile, including toxin-producing strains can be observed in neonatal 
piglets. The significance for animal health and the risk of a carrier status 
need to be addressed in future studies.
