Clostridium sordellii infections cause gangrene and edema in humans and 
gastrointestinal infections in livestock. One of the principle virulence factors 
is TcsL, a large protein toxin which glucosylates host GTPases to cause 
cytopathic and cytotoxic effects. TcsL has two enzymatic domains, an N-terminal 
glucosyltransferase domain (GTD) and an autoprocessing domain responsible for 
release of the GTD within the cell. The GTD can then use its N-terminal membrane 
localization domain (MLD) for orientation on membranes and modification of 
GTPases. This study describes the use of conditionally immortalized murine 
pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells as a model for the study of TcsL 
functional activities. Point mutations that disrupt the glucosyltransferase, 
autoprocessing, or membrane localization activities were introduced into a 
recombinant version of TcsL, and the activities of these mutants were compared 
to those of wild-type toxin. We observed that all mutants are defective or 
impaired in cytotoxicity but differ in their modification of Rac1 and Ras. The 
data suggest a model where differences in GTPase localization dictate cellular 
responses to intoxication and highlight the importance of autoprocessing in the 
function of TcsL. IMPORTANCE Clostridium sordellii is a bacterium that can 
infect humans and cause serious disease and death. The principle virulence 
factor associated with clinical symptoms is a large protein toxin known as 
lethal toxin. The mechanism of lethal-toxin intoxication is assumed to be 
similar to that of the homologous toxins from C. difficile, but very few studies 
have been done in the context of endothelial cells, a relevant target in 
C. sordellii infections. This study was designed to test the role of the 
lethal-toxin enzymatic activities and membrane localization in endothelial cell 
toxicity and host substrate modification.
