Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) infection (CDI) is the main cause of 
nosocomial antibiotic-associated colitis and increased incidence of 
community-associated diarrhea in industrialized countries. At present, the 
primary treatment of CDI is antibiotic administration, which is effective but 
often associated with recurrence, especially in the elderly. Pathogenic strains 
produce enterotoxin, toxin A (TcdA), and cytotoxin, toxin B (TcdB), which are 
necessary for C. difficile induced diarrhea and gut pathological changes. 
Administration of anti-toxin antibodies provides an alternative approach to 
treat CDI, and has shown promising results in preclinical and clinical studies. 
In the current study, several humanized anti-TcdA and anti-TcdB monoclonal 
antibodies were generated and their protective potency was characterized in a 
hamster infection model. The humanized anti-TcdA (CANmAbA4) and anti-TcdB 
(CANmAbB4 and CANmAbB1) antibodies showed broad spectrum in vitro neutralization 
of toxins from clinical strains and neutralization in a mouse toxin challenge 
model. Moreover, co-administration of humanized antibodies (CANmAbA4 and 
CANmAbB4 cocktail) provided a high level of protection in a dose dependent 
manner (85% versus 57% survival at day 22 for 50 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg doses, 
respectively) in a hamster gastrointestinal infection (GI) model. This study 
describes the protective effects conferred by novel neutralizing anti-toxin 
monoclonal antibodies against C. difficile toxins and their potential as 
therapeutic agents in treating CDI.
