Canonical inflammasome activation induces a caspase-1/gasdermin D 
(Gsdmd)-dependent lytic cell death called pyroptosis that promotes antimicrobial 
host defense but may contribute to sepsis. The nature of the caspase-1-dependent 
change in plasma membrane (PM) permeability during pyroptotic progression 
remains incompletely defined. We assayed propidium(2+) (Pro(2+)) influx kinetics 
during NLRP3 or Pyrin inflammasome activation in murine bone marrow-derived 
macrophages (BMDMs) as an indicator of this PM permeabilization. BMDMs were 
characterized by rapid Pro(2+) influx after initiation of NLRP3 or Pyrin 
inflammasomes by nigericin (NG) or Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB), 
respectively. No Pro(2+) uptake in response to NG or TcdB was observed in 
Casp1(-/-) or Asc(-/-) BMDMs. The cytoprotectant glycine profoundly suppressed 
NG and TcdB-induced lysis but not Pro(2+) influx. The absence of Gsdmd 
expression resulted in suppression of NG-stimulated Pro(2+) influx and 
pyroptotic lysis. Extracellular La(3+) and Gd(3+) rapidly and reversibly blocked 
the induced Pro(2+) influx and markedly delayed pyroptotic lysis without 
limiting upstream inflammasome assembly and caspase-1 activation. Thus, 
caspase-1-driven pyroptosis requires induction of initial prelytic pores in the 
PM that are dependent on Gsdmd expression. These PM pores also facilitated the 
efflux of cytosolic ATP and influx of extracellular Ca(2+) Although lanthanides 
and Gsdmd deletion both suppressed PM pore activity and pyroptotic lysis, robust 
IL-1β release was observed in lanthanide-treated BMDMs but not in 
Gsdmd-deficient cells. This suggests roles for Gsdmd in both passive IL-1β 
release secondary to pyroptotic lysis and in nonlytic/nonclassical IL-1β export.
