Clostridium difficile is a global health burden and the leading cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea worldwide, causing severe gastrointestinal 
disease and death. Three well characterised toxins are encoded by this bacterium 
in two genetic loci, specifically, TcdB (toxin B) and TcdA (toxin A) in the 
Pathogenicity Locus (PaLoc) and binary toxin (CDT) in the genomically distinct 
CDT locus (CdtLoc). Toxin production is controlled by regulators specific to 
each locus. The orphan response regulator, CdtR, encoded within the CdtLoc, 
up-regulates CDT production. Until now there has been no suggestion that CdtR 
influences TcdA and TcdB production since it is not carried by all 
PaLoc-containing strains and CdtLoc is not linked genetically to PaLoc. Here we 
show that, in addition to CDT, CdtR regulates TcdA and TcdB production but that 
this effect is strain dependent. Of clinical relevance, CdtR increased the 
production of TcdA, TcdB and CDT in two epidemic ribotype 027 human strains, 
modulating their virulence in a mouse infection model. Strains traditionally 
from animal lineages, notably ribotype 078 strains, are increasingly being 
isolated from humans and their genetic and phenotypic analysis is critical for 
future studies on this important pathogen. Here we show that CdtR-mediated toxin 
regulation did not occur in other strain backgrounds, including a ribotype 078 
animal strain. The finding that toxin gene regulation is strain dependent 
highlights the regulatory diversity between C. difficile isolates and the 
importance of studying virulence regulation in diverse lineages and clinically 
relevant strains. Our work provides the first evidence that TcdA, TcdB and CDT 
production is linked by a common regulatory mechanism and that CdtR may act as a 
global regulator of virulence in epidemic 027 strains.
