BACKGROUND: Oral vancomycin remains the mainstay of therapy for severe 
infections produced by Clostridium difficile, the most prevalent cause of 
healthcare-associated infectious diarrhoea in developed countries. However, its 
short- and long-term effects on the human intestinal microbiota remain largely 
unknown.
METHODS: We utilized high-throughput sequencing to analyse the effects of 
vancomycin on the faecal human microbiota up to 22 weeks post-antibiotic 
cessation. The clinical relevance of the observed microbiota perturbations was 
studied in mice.
RESULTS: During vancomycin therapy, most intestinal microbiota genera and 
operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were depleted in all analysed subjects, 
including all baseline OTUs from the phylum Bacteroidetes. This was accompanied 
by a vast expansion of genera associated with infections, including Klebsiella 
and Escherichia/Shigella. Following antibiotic cessation, marked differences in 
microbiota resilience were observed among subjects. While some individuals 
recovered a microbiota close to baseline composition, in others, up to 89% of 
abundant OTUs could no longer be detected. The clinical relevance of the 
observed microbiota changes was further demonstrated in mice, which developed 
analogous microbiota alterations. During vancomycin treatment, mice were highly 
susceptible to intestinal colonization by an antibiotic-resistant pathogen and, 
upon antibiotic cessation, a less-resilient microbiota allowed higher levels of 
pathogen colonization.
CONCLUSIONS: Oral vancomycin induces drastic and consistent changes in the human 
intestinal microbiota. Upon vancomycin cessation, the microbiota recovery rate 
varied considerably among subjects, which could influence, as validated in mice, 
the level of susceptibility to pathogen intestinal colonization. Our results 
demonstrate the negative long-term effects of vancomycin, which should be 
considered as a fundamental aspect of the cost-benefit equation for antibiotic 
prescription.

Â© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.
