Clostridium difficile is a diarrheagenic pathogen associated with significant 
mortality and morbidity. While its glucosylating toxins are primary virulence 
determinants, there is increasing appreciation of important roles for non-toxin 
factors in C. difficile pathogenesis. Cell wall glycopolymers (CWGs) influence 
the virulence of various pathogens. Five C. difficile CWGs, including PSII, have 
been structurally characterized, but their biosynthesis and significance in C. 
difficile infection is unknown. We explored the contribution of a conserved CWG 
locus to C. difficile cell-surface integrity and virulence. Attempts at 
disrupting multiple genes in the locus, including one encoding a predicted CWG 
exporter mviN, were unsuccessful, suggesting essentiality of the respective gene 
products. However, antisense RNA-mediated mviN downregulation resulted in slight 
morphology defects, retarded growth, and decreased surface PSII deposition. Two 
other genes, lcpA and lcpB, with putative roles in CWG anchoring, could be 
disrupted by insertional inactivation. lcpA- and lcpB- mutants had distinct 
phenotypes, implying non-redundant roles for the respective proteins. The lcpB- 
mutant was defective in surface PSII deposition and shedding, and exhibited a 
remodeled cell surface characterized by elongated and helical morphology, 
aberrantly-localized cell septae, and an altered surface-anchored protein 
profile. Both lcpA- and lcpB- strains also displayed heightened virulence in a 
hamster model of C. difficile disease. We propose that gene products of the C. 
difficile CWG locus are essential, that they direct the production/assembly of 
key antigenic surface polysaccharides, and thereby have complex roles in 
virulence.
