The inflammatory response to the colonic pathogen Clostridium difficile is 
characterized by the induction of inflammatory cytokines including 
Interleukin-23 (IL-23) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and the recruitment of myeloid 
cells including Ly6CHigh monocytes. IL-23 knockout mice showed reduced 
expression of the monocyte chemokines Ccl4 and Ccl7, but not Ccl2, as well as 
reduced Ly6CHigh Ly6GMid monocyte recruitment to the colon in response to C. 
difficile colitis. Clostridium difficile-infected CCR2-/- (CCR2 KO) mice showed 
a significant defect in Ly6CHigh Ly6GMid monocyte recruitment to the colon in 
response to C. difficile. Although there was no decrease in expression of the 
inflammatory cytokines Il1b, Il6 or Tnf or reduction in the severity of colonic 
histopathology associated with ablation of monocyte recruitment, Slpi and Inos 
expression was significantly reduced in the colons of these animals. 
Additionally, neutralization of IFN-γ through the administration of anti-IFN-γ 
monoclonal antibody resulted in a significant reduction in the expression of the 
IFN-γ-inducible chemokines Cxcl9 and Cxcl10, but not a reduction in the 
neutrophil chemokines Cxcl1, Cxcl2 and Ccl3 or the monocyte chemokine Ccl2. 
Consistently, monocyte and neutrophil recruitment were unchanged following 
anti-IFN-γ treatment. Additionally, Inos and Slpi expression were unchanged 
following anti-IFN-γ treatment, suggesting that Inos and Slpi regulation is 
independent of IFN-γ during C. difficile colitis. Taken together, these data 
strongly suggest that IL-23 and CCR2 signalling are required for monocyte 
recruitment during C. difficile colitis. Additionally, these studies also 
suggest that monocytes, but not IFN-γ, are necessary for full expression of Inos 
and Slpi in the colon.
