OBJECTIVES: Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is increasingly being used 
for treatment of recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (R-CDI) that cannot 
be cured with antibiotics alone. In addition, FMT is being investigated for a 
variety of indications where restoration or restructuring of the gut microbial 
community is hypothesized to be beneficial. We sought to develop a stable, 
freeze-dried encapsulated preparation of standardized fecal microbiota that can 
be used for FMT with ease and convenience in clinical practice and research.
METHODS: We systematically developed a lyophilization protocol that preserved 
the viability of bacteria across the taxonomic spectrum found in fecal 
microbiota and yielded physicochemical properties that enabled consistent 
encapsulation. We also treated a cohort of R-CDI patients with a range of doses 
of encapsulated microbiota and analyzed the associated changes in the fecal 
microbiome of the recipients.
RESULTS: The optimized lyophilized preparation satisfied all our preset goals 
for physicochemical properties, encapsulation ease, stability at different 
temperatures, and microbiota viability in vitro and in vivo (germ-free mice). 
The capsule treatment was administered to 49 patients. Overall, 43/49 (88%) of 
patients achieved a clinical success, defined as no recurrence of CDI over 2 
months. Analysis of the fecal microbiome demonstrated near normalization of the 
fecal microbial community by 1 month following FMT treatment. The simplest 
protocol using the lowest dose (2.1-2.5 Ã— 1011 bacteria in 2-3 capsules) without 
any colon purgative performed equally well in terms of clinical outcomes and 
microbiota engraftment.
CONCLUSIONS: A single administration of encapsulated, freeze-dried fecal 
microbiota from a healthy donor was highly successful in treating 
antibiotic-refractory R-CDI syndrome.
