Clostridium difficile releases two exotoxins, toxin A and toxin B, which disrupt 
the epithelial cell barrier in the gut to increase mucosal permeability and 
trigger inflammation with severe diarrhea. Many studies have suggested that 
enteric nerves are also directly involved in the progression of this 
toxin-mediated inflammation and diarrhea. C. difficile toxin A is known to 
enhance neurotransmitter secretion, increase gut motility, and suppress 
sympathetic neurotransmission in the guinea pig colitis model. Although previous 
studies have examined the pathophysiological role of enteric nerves in gut 
inflammation, the direct effect of toxins on neuronal cells and the molecular 
mechanisms underlying toxin-induced neuronal stress remained to be unveiled. 
Here, we examined the toxicity of C. difficile toxin A against neuronal cells 
(SH-SY5Y). We found that toxin A treatment time- and dose-dependently decreased 
cell viability and triggered apoptosis accompanied by caspase-3 activation in 
this cell line. These effects were found to depend on the up-regulation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the subsequent activation of p38 MAPK and 
induction of p21Cip1/Waf1. Moreover, the N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC)-induced 
down-regulation of ROS could recover the viability loss and apoptosis of toxin 
A-treated neuronal cells. These results collectively suggest that C. difficile 
toxin A is toxic for neuronal cells, and that this is associated with rapid ROS 
generation and subsequent p38 MAPK activation and p21Cip1/Waf1 up-regulation. 
Moreover, our data suggest that NAC could inhibit the toxicity of C. difficile 
toxin A toward enteric neurons.
