Clostridium difficile and Clostridium spiroforme have only in recent years been 
recognized as intestinal pathogens. They both produce toxins that are also 
produced by other clostridia. C. difficile toxins A and B are produced by C. 
sordellii and a few strains of C. perfringens whereas C. spiroforme produces the 
same toxins as C. perfringens Type E (iota toxin). Iota toxin activity may be 
the product of two proteins. Toxigenic strains of C. spiroforme and Type E 
produce two antigens which possess much more biological activity when 
administered together than when given alone. C. difficile was thought for some 
time to produce only a single toxin, but then the enterotoxic activity was shown 
to be due to a separate toxin (toxin A). This toxin increases the oral toxicity 
of toxin B (the main cytotoxin) and may increase the permeability of the colon. 
Toxin A binds to a specific receptor in hamster brush border membranes and in 
the membranes of rabbit erythrocytes. This receptor appears to be a 
glycoprotein. The receptor can be extracted from the membrane with Triton and 
binds to immobilized toxin A. The receptor can be extracted and used to coat 
plastic plates as a first phase in an ELISA assay. Another assay has been 
developed in which the toxin A binds to the red cells and then the erythrocytes 
are agglutinated with antitoxin. An even more sensitive assay consists of using 
rabbit erythrocyte ghosts to bind the toxin and then precipitating the ghosts 
with antibody to toxin A attached to latex beads. Monoclonal antibodies to toxin 
A also have been developed and are used in these and other assays.
