BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a common nosocomial 
diarrheal illness increasingly associated with mortality in United States. The 
underlying factors and mechanisms behind the recent increases in morbidity from 
CDI have not been fully elucidated. Murine models suggest a mucosal barrier 
breakdown leads to bacterial translocation and subsequent bloodstream infection 
(BSI). This study tests the hypothesis that CDI is associated with subsequent 
BSI in humans.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective cohort study on 1132 inpatients 
hospitalized >72 h with available stool test results for toxigenic C. difficile. 
The primary outcome was BSI following CDI. Secondary outcomes included 30-day 
mortality, colectomy, readmission, and ICU admission. Unadjusted and adjusted 
logistic regression models were developed.
RESULTS: CDI occurred in 570 of 1132 patients (50.4%). BSI occurred in 86 (7.6%) 
patients. Enterococcus (14%) and Klebsiella (14%) species were the most common 
organisms. Patients with BSI had higher comorbidity scores and were more likely 
to be male, on immunosuppression, critically ill, and have a central venous 
catheter in place. Of the patients with BSI, 36 (42%) had CDI. CDI was not 
associated with subsequent BSI (OR 0.69; 95% CI 0.44-1.08; P = 0.103) in 
unadjusted analysis. In multivariable modeling, CDI appeared protective against 
subsequent BSI (OR 0.57; 95% CI 0.34-0.96; P = 0.036). Interaction modeling 
suggests a complicated relationship among CDI, BSI, antibiotic exposure, and 
central venous catheter use.
CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort of inpatients that underwent testing for CDI, CDI 
was not a risk factor for developing subsequent BSI.
