Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) is an anaerobic gram-positive pathogen that 
is the leading cause of nosocomial bacterial infection globally. C. difficile 
infection (CDI) typically occurs after ingestion of infectious spores by a 
patient that has been treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. While CDI is a 
toxin-mediated disease, transmission and pathogenesis are dependent on the 
ability to produce viable spores. These spores must become metabolically active 
(germinate) in order to cause disease. C. difficile spore germination occurs 
when spores encounter bile salts and other co-germinants within the small 
intestine, however, the germination signaling cascade is unclear. Here we 
describe a signaling role for Ca2+ during C. difficile spore germination and 
provide direct evidence that intestinal Ca2+ coordinates with bile salts to 
stimulate germination. Endogenous Ca2+ (released from within the spore) and a 
putative AAA+ ATPase, encoded by Cd630_32980, are both essential for 
taurocholate-glycine induced germination in the absence of exogenous Ca2+. 
However, environmental Ca2+ replaces glycine as a co-germinant and circumvents 
the need for endogenous Ca2+ fluxes. Cd630_32980 is dispensable for colonization 
in a murine model of C. difficile infection and ex vivo germination in mouse 
ileal contents. Calcium-depletion of the ileal contents prevented mutant spore 
germination and reduced WT spore germination by 90%, indicating that Ca2+ 
present within the gastrointestinal tract plays a critical role in C. difficile 
germination, colonization, and pathogenesis. These data provide a biological 
mechanism that may explain why individuals with inefficient intestinal calcium 
absorption (e.g., vitamin D deficiency, proton pump inhibitor use) are more 
prone to CDI and suggest that modulating free intestinal calcium is a potential 
strategy to curb the incidence of CDI.
