Lowering the gut exposure to antibiotics during treatments can prevent 
microbiota disruption. We evaluated the effects of an activated charcoal-based 
adsorbent, DAV131A, on the fecal free moxifloxacin concentration and mortality 
in a hamster model of moxifloxacin-induced Clostridium difficile infection. A 
total of 215 hamsters receiving moxifloxacin subcutaneously (day 1 [D1] to D5) 
were orally infected at D3 with C. difficile spores. They received various doses 
(0 to 1,800 mg/kg of body weight/day) and schedules (twice a day [BID] or three 
times a day [TID]) of DAV131A (D1 to D8). Moxifloxacin concentrations and C. 
difficile counts were determined at D3, and mortality was determined at D12 We 
compared mortality rates, moxifloxacin concentrations, and C. difficile counts 
according to DAV131A regimen and modeled the links between DAV131A regimen, 
moxifloxacin concentration, and mortality. All hamsters that received no DAV131A 
died, but none of those that received 1,800 mg/kg/day died. Significant 
dose-dependent relationships between DAV131A dose and (i) mortality, (ii) 
moxifloxacin concentration, and (iii) C. difficile count were evidenced. 
Mathematical modeling suggested that (i) lowering the moxifloxacin concentration 
at D3, which was 58 μg/g (95% confidence interval [CI] = 50 to 66 μg/g) without 
DAV131A, to 17 μg/g (14 to 21 μg/g) would reduce mortality by 90%; and (ii) this 
would be achieved with a daily DAV131A dose of 703 mg/kg (596 to 809 mg/kg). In 
this model of C. difficile infection, DAV131A reduced mortality in a 
dose-dependent manner by decreasing the fecal free moxifloxacin concentration.
