Clostridium difficile is considered to be one of the major cause of infectious 
diarrhea in healthcare systems worldwide. Symptoms of C. difficile infection are 
caused largely by the production of two cytotoxins: toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B 
(TcdB). Vaccine development is considered desirable as it would decrease the 
mounting medical costs and mortality associated with C. difficile infections. 
Biodegradable nanoparticles composed of poly-γ-glutamic acid (γ-PGA) and 
chitosan have proven to be a safe and effective antigen delivery system for many 
viral vaccines. However, few studies have used this efficient antigen carrier 
for bacterial vaccine development. In this study, we eliminated the toxin 
activity domain of toxin B by constructing a recombinant protein rTcdB consists 
of residues 1852-2363 of TcdB receptor binding domain. The rTcdB was 
encapsulated in nanoparticles composed of γ-PGA and chitosan. Three rounds of 
intraperitoneal vaccination led to high anti-TcdB antibody responses and 
afforded mice full protection mice from lethal dose of C. difficile spore 
challenge. Protection was associated with high levels of toxin-neutralizing 
antibodies, and the rTcdB-encapsulated NPs elicited a longer-lasting antibody 
titers than antigen with the conventional adjuvant, aluminum hydroxide. 
Significant reductions in the level of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines 
were observed in vaccinated mouse. These results suggested that polymeric 
nanocomplex-based vaccine design can be useful in developing vaccine against C. 
difficile infections.
