Many microRNAs participate in the development, differentiation and function 
preservation of the embryonic and adult inner ear, but many details still need 
to be elucidated regarding the numerous microRNAs in the inner ear. Based on 
previous investigations on the microRNA profile in the inner ear, we confirmed 
that several microRNAs are expressed in the inner ear, and we detected the 
spatial expression of these microRNAs in the neonatal mouse inner ear. Then we 
focused on miR-194 for its specific expression with a dynamic spatiotemporal 
pattern during inner ear development. Overexpression of miR-194 in cultured 
spiral ganglion cells significantly affected the dendrites of differentiated 
neurons, with more branching and obviously dispersed nerve fibres. Furthermore, 
the cytoskeleton of cultured cells was markedly affected, as disordered actin 
filaments resulting from miR-194 overexpression and enhanced filaments resulting 
from miR-194 knockdown were observed. Together with the bioinformatic methods, 
the RT-qPCR and western blot results showed that RhoB is a candidate target of 
miR-194 in the morphogenesis of spiral ganglion neurons. Additionally, the 
double luciferase reporter system was used to identify RhoB as a novel target of 
miR-194. Finally, the inhibition of RhoB activation by Clostridium difficile 
toxin B disturbed the organization of the actin filament, similar to the effects 
of miR-194 overexpression. In summary, we investigated microRNA expression in 
the mouse inner ear, and demonstrated that miR-194 is dynamically expressed 
during inner ear development; importantly, we found that miR-194 affects neuron 
morphogenesis positively through Rho B-mediated F-actin rearrangement.
