Metronidazole, a nitroimidazole, remains a front-line choice for treatment of 
infections related to inflammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract 
including colitis linked to Clostridium difficile. Despite >60 years of 
research, the metabolism of metronidazole and associated cytotoxicity is not 
definitively characterized. Nitroimidazoles are prodrugs that are reductively 
activated (the nitro group is reduced) under low oxygen tension, leading to 
imidazole fragmentation and cytotoxicity. It remains unclear if nitroimidazole 
reduction (activation) contributes to the cytotoxicity profile, or whether 
subsequent fragmentation of the imidazole ring and formed metabolites alone 
mediate cytotoxicity. A molecular mechanism underpinning high level (>256 mg/L) 
bacterial resistance to metronidazole also remains elusive. Considering the 
widespread use of metronidazole and other nitroimidazoles, this review was 
undertaken to emphasize the structure-cytotoxicity profile of the numerous 
metabolites of metronidazole in human and murine models and to examine 
conflicting reports regarding metabolite-DNA interactions. An alternative 
hypothesis, that DNA synthesis and repair of existing DNA is indirectly 
inhibited by metronidazole is proposed. Prokaryotic metabolism of metronidazole 
is detailed to discuss new resistance mechanisms. Additionally, the review 
contextualizes the history and current use of metronidazole, rates of 
metronidazole resistance including metronidazole MDR as well as the biosynthesis 
of azomycin, the natural precursor of metronidazole. Changes in the 
gastrointestinal microbiome and the host after metronidazole administration are 
also reviewed. Finally, novel nitroimidazoles and new antibiotic strategies are 
discussed.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
