OBJECTIVES: To establish the role of specific, non-synonymous SNPs in the RNA 
polymerase β subunit (rpoB) gene in reducing the susceptibility of Clostridium 
difficile to fidaxomicin and to explore the potential in vivo significance of 
rpoB mutant strains.
METHODS: Allelic exchange was used to introduce three different SNPs into the 
rpoB gene of an erythromycin-resistant derivative (CRG20291) of C. difficile 
R20291. The genome sequences of the created mutants were determined and each 
mutant analysed with respect to growth and sporulation rates, toxin A/B 
production and cytotoxicity against Vero cells, and in competition assays. Their 
comparative virulence and colonization ability was also assessed in a hamster 
infection model.
RESULTS: The MIC of fidaxomicin displayed by three mutants CRG20291-TA, 
CRG20291-TG and CRG20291-GT was substantially increased (>32, 8 and 2 mg/L, 
respectively) relative to that of the parent strain (0.25 mg/L). Genome 
sequencing established that the intended mutagenic substitutions in rpoB were 
the only changes present. Relative to CRG20291, all mutants had attenuated 
growth, were outcompeted by the parental strain, had lower sporulation and toxin 
A/B production capacities, and displayed diminished cytotoxicity. In a hamster 
model, virulence of all three mutants was significantly reduced compared with 
the progenitor strain, whereas the degree of caecum colonization was unaltered.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that particular SNPs in rpoB lead to reduced 
fidaxomicin susceptibility. These mutations were associated with a fitness cost 
in vitro and reduced virulence in vivo.
