Clostridium difficile infection (CDI), a common cause of hospital-acquired 
infections, typically occurs after disruption of the normal gut microbiome by 
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Fidaxomicin is a narrow-spectrum antibiotic that 
demonstrates a reduced impact on the normal gut microbiota and is approved for 
the treatment of CDI. To further explore the benefits of this property, we used 
a murine model to examine the effects of fidaxomicin versus vancomycin on gut 
microbiota and susceptibility to C. difficile colonization while tracking 
microbiota recovery over time. Mice were exposed to fidaxomicin or vancomycin by 
oral gavage for 3 days and subsequently challenged with C. difficile spores at 
predetermined time points up to 21 days postexposure to antibiotics. Fecal 
samples were subsequently collected for analysis. Twenty-four hours 
postchallenge, mice were euthanized and the colon contents harvested. The 
microbiota was characterized using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. All 
fidaxomicin-exposed mice (except for one at day 8) were resistant to C. 
difficile colonization. However, 9 of 15 vancomycin-exposed mice were 
susceptible to C. difficile colonization until day 12. All vancomycin-exposed 
mice recovered colonization resistance by day 16. Bacterial diversity was 
similar prior to antibiotic exposure in both arms and decreased substantially 
after exposure. A shift in taxonomic structure and composition occurred after 
both exposures; however, the shift was greater in vancomycin-exposed than in 
fidaxomicin-exposed mice. In summary, compared with vancomycin, fidaxomicin 
exposure had less impact on microbiota composition, promoted faster microbial 
recovery, and had less impact on the loss of C. difficile colonization 
resistance.
