BACKGROUND: Over the past several decades, there has been a significant increase 
in the incidence of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in patients suffering 
from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, a wild-type animal model is not 
available to study these comorbid diseases.
METHODS: We evaluated the susceptibility to CDI of mice with dextran sulfate 
sodium salt (DSS)-induced colitis (IBD mice) with or without antibiotic 
exposure; we examined the histopathology and cytokine response in the 
concomitant diseases after the model was created.
RESULTS: No CDI occurs in healthy control mice, wherease the incidence of CDI in 
IBD mice is 40%; however, in IBD mice that received antibiotics, the incidence 
of CDI is 100% and the disease is accompanied by high levels of toxins in the 
mouse feces and sera. Compared to IBD and CDI alone, those IBD mice infected 
with C. difficile have more severe symptoms, toxemia, histopathological damage, 
and higher mortality. Moreover, several proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines 
are significantly elevated in the colon tissues from IBD mice infected with C. 
difficile.
CONCLUSIONS: We, for the first time, demonstrate in an animal model that mice 
with dextran sulfate sodium induced-inflammatory bowel disease are significantly 
more susceptible to C. difficile infection, and that the bacterial infection led 
to more severe disease and death. These findings are consistent with clinical 
observations, thus, the animal model will permit us to study the pathogenesis of 
these concurrent diseases and to develop therapeutic strategies against the 
comorbidity of IBD and CDI.
