Clostridium difficile is the primary cause of nosocomial diarrhea and 
pseudomembranous colitis. It produces dormant spores, which serve as an 
infectious vehicle responsible for transmission of the disease and persistence 
of the organism in the environment. In Bacillus subtilis, the sin locus coding 
SinR (113 aa) and SinI (57 aa) is responsible for sporulation inhibition. In B. 
subtilis, SinR mainly acts as a repressor of its target genes to control 
sporulation, biofilm formation, and autolysis. SinI is an inhibitor of SinR, so 
their interaction determines whether SinR can inhibit its target gene 
expression. The C. difficile genome carries two sinR homologs in the operon that 
we named sinR and sinR', coding for SinR (112 aa) and SinR' (105 aa), 
respectively. In this study, we constructed and characterized sin locus mutants 
in two different C. difficile strains R20291 and JIR8094, to decipher the 
locus's role in C. difficile physiology. Transcriptome analysis of the sinRR' 
mutants revealed their pleiotropic roles in controlling several pathways 
including sporulation, toxin production, and motility in C. difficile. Through 
various genetic and biochemical experiments, we have shown that SinR can 
regulate transcription of key regulators in these pathways, which includes sigD, 
spo0A, and codY. We have found that SinR' acts as an antagonist to SinR by 
blocking its repressor activity. Using a hamster model, we have also 
demonstrated that the sin locus is needed for successful C. difficile infection. 
This study reveals the sin locus as a central link that connects the gene 
regulatory networks of sporulation, toxin production, and motility; three key 
pathways that are important for C. difficile pathogenesis.
