House mice (Mus musculus) thrive in large urban centers worldwide. Nonetheless, 
little is known about the role that they may play in contributing to 
environmental contamination with potentially pathogenic bacteria. Here, we 
describe the fecal microbiome of house mice with emphasis on detection of 
pathogenic bacteria and antimicrobial resistance genes by molecular methods. 
Four hundred sixteen mice were collected from predominantly residential 
buildings in seven sites across New York City over a period of 13 months. 16S 
rRNA sequencing identified Bacteroidetes as dominant and revealed high levels of 
Proteobacteria A targeted PCR screen of 11 bacteria, as indicated by 16S rRNA 
analyses, found that mice are carriers of several gastrointestinal 
disease-causing agents, including Shigella, Salmonella, Clostridium difficile, 
and diarrheagenic Escherichia coli Furthermore, genes mediating antimicrobial 
resistance to fluoroquinolones (qnrB) and β-lactam drugs (blaSHV and blaACT/MIR) 
were widely distributed. Culture and molecular strain typing of C. difficile 
revealed that mice harbor ribotypes associated with human disease, and screening 
of kidney samples demonstrated genetic evidence of pathogenic Leptospira 
species. In concert, these findings support the need for further research into 
the role of house mice as potential reservoirs for human pathogens and 
antimicrobial resistance in the built environment.IMPORTANCE Mice are commensal 
pests often found in close proximity to humans, especially in urban centers. We 
surveyed mice from seven sites across New York City and found multiple 
pathogenic bacteria associated with febrile and gastrointestinal disease as well 
as an array of antimicrobial resistance genes.
