Clostridium difficile is a major nosocomial pathogen responsible for close to 
half a million infections and 27,000 deaths annually in the U.S. Preceding 
antibiotic treatment is a major risk factor for C. difficile infection (CDI) 
leading to recognition that commensal microbes play a key role in resistance to 
CDI. Current antibiotic treatment of CDI is only partially successful due to a 
high rate of relapse. As a result, there is interest in understanding the 
effects of microbes on CDI susceptibility to support treatment of patients with 
probiotic microbes or entire microbial communities (e.g., fecal microbiota 
transplantation). The results reported here demonstrate that colonization with 
the human commensal fungus Candida albicans protects against lethal CDI in a 
murine model. Colonization with C. albicans did not increase the colonization 
resistance of the host. Rather, our findings showed that one effect of C. 
albicans colonization was to enhance a protective immune response. Mice 
pre-colonized with C. albicans expressed higher levels of IL-17A in infected 
tissue following C. difficile challenge compared to mice that were not colonized 
with C. albicans. Administration of cytokine IL-17A was demonstrated to be 
protective against lethal murine CDI in mice not colonized with C. albicans. C. 
albicans colonization was associated with changes in the abundance of some 
bacterial components of the gut microbiota. Therefore, C. albicans colonization 
altered the gut ecosystem, enhancing survival after C. difficile challenge. 
These findings demonstrate a new, beneficial role for C. albicans gut 
colonization.
