Clostridium difficile is an opportunistic diarrhoeal pathogen, and C. difficile 
infection (CDI) represents a major health care concern, causing an estimated 
15,000 deaths per year in the United States alone 1 . Several enteric pathogens, 
including C. difficile, leverage inflammation and the accompanying microbial 
dysbiosis to thrive in the distal gut 2 . Although diet is among the most 
powerful available tools for affecting the health of humans and their 
relationship with their microbiota, investigation into the effects of diet on 
CDI has been limited. Here, we show in mice that the consumption of 
microbiota-accessible carbohydrates (MACs) found in dietary plant 
polysaccharides has a significant effect on CDI. Specifically, using a model of 
antibiotic-induced CDI that typically resolves within 12 days of infection, we 
demonstrate that MAC-deficient diets perpetuate CDI. We show that C. difficile 
burdens are suppressed through the addition of either a diet containing a 
complex mixture of MACs or a simplified diet containing inulin as the sole MAC 
source. We show that switches between these dietary conditions are coincident 
with changes to microbiota membership, its metabolic output and 
C. difficile-mediated inflammation. Together, our data demonstrate the outgrowth 
of MAC-utilizing taxa and the associated end products of MAC metabolism, namely, 
the short-chain fatty acids acetate, propionate and butyrate, are associated 
with decreased C. difficile fitness despite increased C. difficile toxin 
expression in the gut. Our findings, when placed into the context of the known 
fibre deficiencies of a human Western diet, provide rationale for pursuing 
MAC-centric dietary strategies as an alternate line of investigation for 
mitigating CDI.
