Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic, spore-forming bacterium that causes 
intestinal infections. Although C. difficile is still predominantly considered 
as a nosocomial pathogen, there has been an increase in the number of 
community-associated infections. Since C. difficile is ubiquitous and can be 
isolated from nearly any environment, one of the possibilities for community 
acquisition could be exposure to spores in the domestic environment. The aim of 
this study was to evaluate the presence of C. difficile spores on shoes, 
slippers and on dog paws and to explore the importance of these surfaces as 
vectors for the dissemination of C. difficile in a domestic environment. 
Overall, C. difficile was present in 14 (70%) of 20 households and in 31 of 90 
(34%) collected samples. Shoes and slippers had the highest positivity rates, 19 
of 44 (43%) and 6 of 21 (28%), respectively, followed by dog paws 6 of 25 (24%). 
Thirteen C. difficilePCR ribotypes were identified with half of the isolates 
belonging to ribotype 014/020, which is the predominant type circulating in 
human population and is also commonly found in the environment (e.g. soil and 
water) in Slovenia. In three households, identical PCR ribotypes were found on 
dog paws, shoes and slippers. To understand the fine-scale genetic relatedness 
of these isolates, we sequenced the genomes. Low level of single nucleotide 
variant (SNV) differences between isolates from the same households, consistent 
with a recent transmission from a common source, were seen for isolates of PCR 
ribotype 014/020 but not for PCR ribotype 010. Our results suggest that shoe 
soles and dog paws could serve for the dissemination of C. difficile spores 
between households and environment and could contribute to community-relevant 
sources for C. difficile infection in humans.
