Antibiotics are considered to be the first line of treatment for mild to 
moderately severe Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in humans. However, 
antibiotics are also risk factors for CDI as they decrease colonization 
resistance against C. difficile by altering the gut microbiota and metabolome. 
Finding compounds that selectively inhibit different stages of the C. difficile 
life cycle, while sparing the indigenous gut microbiota is important for the 
development of alternatives to standard antibiotic treatment. 2-aminoimidazole 
(2-AI) molecules are known to disrupt bacterial protection mechanisms in 
antibiotic resistant bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter 
baumannii, and Staphylococcus aureus, but are yet to be evaluated against C. 
difficile. A comprehensive small molecule-screening pipeline was developed to 
investigate how novel small molecules affect different stages of the C. 
difficile life cycle (growth, toxin, and sporulation) in vitro, and a library of 
commensal bacteria that are associated with colonization resistance against C. 
difficile. The initial screening tested the efficacy of eleven 2-AI molecules 
(compound 1 through 11) against C. difficile R20291 compared to a vancomycin (2 
Î¼g/ml) control. Molecules were selected for their ability to inhibit C. 
difficile growth, toxin activity, and sporulation. Further testing included 
growth inhibition of other C. difficile strains (CD196, M68, CF5, 630, BI9, 
M120) belonging to distinct PCR ribotypes, and a commensal panel (Bacteroides 
fragilis, B. thetaiotaomicron, C. scindens, C. hylemonae, Lactobacillus 
acidophilus, L. gasseri, Escherichia coli, B. longum subsp. infantis). Three 
molecules compound 1 and 2, and 3 were microbicidal, whereas compounds 4, 7, 9, 
and 11 inhibited toxin activity without affecting the growth of C. difficile 
strains and the commensal microbiota. The antimicrobial and anti-toxin effects 
of 2-AI molecules need to be further characterized for mode of action and 
validated in a mouse model of CDI.
