Diarrhoeal diseases belong to the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in 
tropical countries, especially in infants and small children. About one billion 
episodes are estimated for this group of age with 4.6 million fatalities. Many 
causes are discussed to explain the high incidence: bottle feeding of infants, 
protein malnutrition, unsafe drinking water and unsafe disposal of excrements 
and sewage, unsufficient consciousness of personal and domestic hygiene, lack of 
knowledge on the origin of disease, and inadequate food hygiene. Among the viral 
infectious agents rotavirus is isolated from 30-40% of enteritis cases in 
infants and small children; Norwalk virus, adenovirus and human calicivirus, 
too, appear to occur worldwide. Enteropathogenic (EPEC) and, especially, 
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) are of primary importance as bacterial 
pathogens. Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli primarily cause disease in infants 
and small children. Shigellae are important whereas salmonellae are less 
frequently identified as a cause for diarrhoeal illness. Yersinia enterocolitica 
is rare in tropical countries. Cholera and infections with other vibrionaceae 
(V. cholerae non-01, V. mimicus, V. parahaemolyticus, aeromonas, Plesiomonas 
shigelloides) mainly occur in coastal areas. Clostridium perfringens type C is 
the causal agent of Enteritis necroticans in several countries, especially New 
Guinea. C. difficile appears to be of minor importance. Among the parasites 
Giardia lamblia and Entamoeba histolytica are the most important organisms 
causing diarrhoeal disease. Macroscopic (visible blood) and microscopic stool 
examination (faecal leukocytes) may be helpful in dysenteric disease to 
distinguish between shigella and E. histolytica infections; it is, however, of 
limited usefulness to discriminate between organisms causing watery diarrhoea.
