Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive spore-former bacterium and the leading 
cause of nosocomial antibiotic-associated diarrhea that can culminate in fatal 
colitis. During the infection, C. difficile produces metabolically dormant 
spores, which persist in the host and can cause recurrence of the infection. The 
surface of C. difficile spores seems to be the key in spore-host interactions 
and persistence. The proteome of the outermost exosporium layer of C. difficile 
spores has been determined, identifying two cysteine-rich exosporium proteins, 
CdeC and CdeM. In this work, we explore the contribution of both cysteine-rich 
proteins in exosporium integrity, spore biology and pathogenesis. Using targeted 
mutagenesis coupled with transmission electron microscopy we demonstrate that 
both cysteine rich proteins, CdeC and CdeM, are morphogenetic factors of the 
exosporium layer of C. difficile spores. Notably, cdeC, but not cdeM spores, 
exhibited defective spore coat, and were more sensitive to ethanol, heat and 
phagocytic cells. In a healthy colonic mucosa (mouse ileal loop assay), cdeC and 
cdeM spore adherence was lower than that of wild-type spores; while in a mouse 
model of recurrence of the disease, cdeC mutant exhibited an increased infection 
and persistence during recurrence. In a competitive infection mouse model, cdeC 
mutant had increased fitness over wild-type. Through complementation analysis 
with FLAG fusion of known exosporium and coat proteins, we demonstrate that CdeC 
and CdeM are required for the recruitment of several exosporium proteins to the 
surface of C. difficile spores. CdeC appears to be conserved exclusively in 
related Peptostreptococcaeace family members, while CdeM is unique to C. 
difficile. Our results sheds light on how CdeC and CdeM affect the biology of C. 
difficile spores and the assembly of the exosporium layer and, demonstrate that 
CdeC affect C. difficile pathogenesis.
