Mice in buildings are a hygiene hazard because they harbour several zoonoses and 
animal diseases. The aim of this study was to gather information on specific 
bacteria in house mice caught in the urban environment. Mice caught in snap 
traps during pest control activities were collected in and around the city of 
Utrecht, the Netherlands, during May-June 2014, October-November 2015 and 
September-November 2016. The gut contents were analysed for ESBL/AmpC-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae, Salmonella spp., and Clostridium difficile and the buccal 
cavities were swabbed for methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). In total, 109 
house mice (Mus musculus) and 22 wood mice (Apodemus sylvaticus) were examined. 
One mouse was found positive for Enterobacter spp. Salmonella spp. and MRSA were 
not found. Of n = 80 mice, 35·0% carried C. difficile (ribotypes in descending 
order of frequency: 014/020, 258, 002, 005, 013, 056, 081 and two unknown 
ribotypes). In conclusion, mouse droppings are a hazard for transmission of C. 
difficile to humans and their environment.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study shows that mice in buildings 
can carry Clostridium difficile ribotypes that are associated with clinical 
disease in humans. Whether the mice are the source or whether they picked up 
these bacteria from the human environment has not been investigated. Either way, 
mouse droppings in the indoor environment are a hazard for transmission of C. 
difficile to humans.

© 2018 The Authors. Letters in Applied Microbiology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of The Society for Applied Microbiology.
