The symptoms of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) are attributed largely to 
two C. difficile toxins, TcdA and TcdB. Significant efforts have been devoted to 
developing vaccines targeting both toxins through parenteral immunization 
routes. However, C. difficile is an enteric pathogen, and mucosal/oral 
immunization would be particularly useful to protect the host against CDI, 
considering that the gut is the main site of disease onset and progression. 
Moreover, vaccines directed only against toxins do not target the cells and 
spores that transmit the disease. Previously, we constructed a chimeric vaccine 
candidate, mTcd138, comprised of the glucosyltransferase and cysteine proteinase 
domains of TcdB and the receptor binding domain of TcdA. In this study, to 
develop an oral vaccine that can target both C. difficile toxins and 
colonization/adhesion factors, we expressed mTcd138 in a nontoxigenic C. 
difficile (NTCD) strain, resulting in strain NTCD_mTcd138. Oral immunization 
with spores of NTCD_mTcd138 provided mice full protection against infection with 
a hypervirulent C. difficile strain, UK6 (ribotype 027). The protective strength 
and efficacy of NTCD_mTcd138 were further evaluated in the acute CDI hamster 
model. Oral immunization with spores of NTCD_mTcd138 also provided hamsters 
significant protection against infection with 2 Ã— 104 UK6 spores, a dose 
200-fold higher than the lethal dose of UK6 in hamsters. These results imply 
that the genetically modified, nontoxigenic C. difficile strain expressing 
mTcd138 may represent a novel mucosal vaccine candidate against CDI.
