Clostridium difficile flagellin FliC is a highly immunogenic pathogen-associated 
molecular pattern playing a key role in C. difficile pathogenesis and gut 
colonization. Here, we designed an oral vaccine against C. difficile with FliC 
encapsulated into pectin beads for colonic release. Bead stability and FliC 
retention was confirmed in vitro using simulated intestinal media (SIM), while 
bead degradation and FliC release was observed upon incubation in simulated 
colonic media (SCM). The importance of FliC encapsulation into pectin beads for 
protection against C. difficile was assessed in a vaccination assay using a 
lethal hamster model of C. difficile infection. Three groups of hamsters orally 
received either FliC-loaded beads or unloaded beads in gastro-resistant capsule 
to limit gastric degradation or free FliC. Two other groups were immunized with 
free FliC, one intra-rectally and the other intra-peritoneally. Hamsters were 
then challenged with a lethal dose of C. difficile VPI 10463. Fifty percent of 
hamsters orally immunized with FliC-loaded beads survived whereas all hamsters 
orally immunized with free FliC died within 7â€¯days post challenge. No 
significant protection was observed in the other groups. Only intra-peritoneally 
immunized hamsters presented anti-FliC IgG antibodies in sera after 
immunizations. These results suggest that an oral immunization with FliC-loaded 
beads probably induced a mucosal immune response, therefore providing a 
protective effect. This study confirms the importance of FliC encapsulation into 
pectin beads for a protective oral vaccine against C. difficile.
