AIMS: Quantitative data on the doses needed to inactivate micro-organisms on 
fomites are not available for ultraviolet applications. The goal of this study 
was to determine the doses of UV light needed to reduce bacteria and murine 
norovirus (MNV) on hard surface fomites through experimentation and to identify 
appropriate models for predicting targeted levels of reduction.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Stainless steel and Formica laminate coupons were selected 
as they are common surfaces found in healthcare settings. Test organisms 
included methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), 
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE), Clostridium difficile and MNV. The 
fomites were inoculated with 105 -107 bacteria or virus and exposed to a range 
of UV doses. The order of resistance to UV irradiation was virus, bacterial 
spore and vegetative cell. The best fitting inactivation curves suggested 
nonlinear responses to increasing doses after a 3-4 log reduction in the test 
organisms. The average UV doses required for a 3 log reduction in the C. 
difficile, MRSA and VRE were 16 000, 6164 and 11 228 (mJ-s cm-2 ) for stainless 
steel, respectively, and 16 000, 11 727 and 12 441 (mJ-s cm-2 ) for Formica 
laminate, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher UV light doses are required to inactivate bacteria and 
viruses on hard surfaces than in suspension. Greater doses are needed to 
inactivate bacterial spores and MNV compared to vegetative bacteria.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Quantitative data and models on UV light 
doses needed to inactivate bacteria and MNV on hard surfaces are now available. 
The generalizable results of this study can be used to estimate required UV 
dosages to achieve targeted levels of inactivation based on estimated levels of 
contamination or to support quantitative microbial risk assessments.
