The gut microbiota plays a critical role in pathogen defense. Studies using 
antibiotic-treated mice reveal mechanisms that increase susceptibility to 
Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI), but risk factors associated with CDI 
in humans extend beyond antibiotic use. Here, we studied the dysbiotic gut 
microbiota of a subset of patients with diarrhea and modeled the gut microbiota 
of these patients by fecal transplantation into germ-free mice. When challenged 
with C. difficile, the germ-free mice transplanted with fecal samples from 
patients with dysbiotic microbial communities showed increased gut amino acid 
concentrations and greater susceptibility to CDI. A C. difficile mutant that was 
unable to use proline as an energy source was unable to robustly infect 
germ-free mice transplanted with a dysbiotic or healthy human gut microbiota. 
Prophylactic dietary intervention using a low-proline or low-protein diet in 
germ-free mice colonized by a dysbiotic human gut microbiota resulted in 
decreased expansion of wild-type C. difficile after challenge, suggesting that 
amino acid availability might be important for CDI. Furthermore, a prophylactic 
fecal microbiota transplant in mice with dysbiosis reduced proline availability 
and protected the mice from CDI. Last, we identified clinical risk factors that 
could potentially predict gut microbial dysbiosis and thus greater 
susceptibility to CDI in a retrospective cohort of patients with diarrhea. 
Identifying at-risk individuals and reducing their susceptibility to CDI through 
gut microbiota-targeted therapies could be a new approach to preventing C. 
difficile infection in susceptible patients.

Copyright Â© 2018 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.
