Three patients with severe Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) caused by an 
unusual strain of C. difficile, PCR ribotype (RT) 251, were identified in New 
South Wales, Australia. All cases presented with severe diarrhoea, two had 
multiple recurrences and one died following a colectomy. C. difficile RT251 
strains were isolated by toxigenic culture. Genetic characterisation was 
performed using techniques including toxin gene profiling, PCR ribotyping, whole 
genome sequencing (WGS), in-silico multi-locus-sequence-typing (MLST) and 
core-genome single nucleotide variant (SNV) analyses. Antimicrobial 
susceptibility was determined using an agar incorporation method. In vitro toxin 
production was confirmed by Vero cell cytotoxicity assay and pathogenicity was 
assessed in a murine model of CDI. All RT251 isolates contained toxin A (tcdA), 
toxin B (tcdB) and binary toxin (cdtA and cdtB) genes. Core-genome analyses 
revealed the RT251 strains were clonal, with 0-5 SNVs between isolates. WGS and 
MLST clustered RT251 in the same evolutionary clade (clade 2) as RT027. Despite 
comparatively lower levels of in vitro toxin production, in the murine model 
RT251 infection resembled RT027 infection. Mice showed marked weight loss, 
severe disease within 48 h post-infection and death. All isolates were 
susceptible to metronidazole and vancomycin. Our observations suggest 
C. difficile RT251 causes severe disease and emphasise the importance of ongoing 
surveillance for new and emerging strains of C. difficile with enhanced 
virulence.
