Clostridioides difficile is the main cause for nosocomial antibiotic associated 
diarrhea and has become a major burden for the health care systems of industrial 
countries. Its main virulence factors, the small GTPase glycosylating toxins 
TcdA and TcdB, are extensively studied. In contrast, the contribution of other 
factors to development and progression of C. difficile infection (CDI) are only 
insufficiently understood. Many bacterial peptidyl-prolyl-cis/trans-isomerases 
(PPIases) have been described in the context of virulence. Among them are the 
parvulin-type PrsA-like PPIases of Gram-positive bacteria. On this basis, we 
identified CD630_35000 as the PrsA2 homolog in C. difficile and conducted its 
enzymatic and phenotypic characterization in order to assess its involvement 
during C. difficile infection. For this purpose, wild type CdPrsA2 and mutant 
variants carrying amino acid exchanges mainly in the PPIase domain were 
recombinantly produced. Recombinant CdPrsA2 showed PPIase activity toward the 
substrate peptide Ala-Xaa-Pro-Phe with a preference for positively charged amino 
acids preceding the proline residue. Mutation of conserved residues in its 
active site pocket impaired the enzymatic activity. A PrsA2 deficient mutant was 
generated in the C. difficile 630Î”erm background using the ClosTron technology. 
Inactivation of prsA2 resulted in a reduced germination rate in response to 
taurocholic acid, and in a slight increase in resistance to the secondary bile 
acids LCA and DCA. Interestingly, in the absence of PrsA2 colonization of mice 
by C. difficile 630 was significantly reduced. We concluded that CdPrsA2 is an 
active PPIase that acts as a virulence modulator by influencing crucial 
processes like sporulation, germination and bile acid resistance resulting in 
attenuated mice colonization.
