Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive, spore-forming anaerobic bacterium that 
infects the colon, causing symptoms ranging from infectious diarrhea to 
fulminant colitis. In the last decade, the number of C. difficile infections has 
dramatically risen, making it the leading cause of reported hospital acquired 
infection in the United States. Bacterial toxins produced during C. difficile 
infection (CDI) damage host epithelial cells, releasing erythrocytes and heme 
into the gastrointestinal lumen. The reactive nature of heme can lead to 
toxicity through membrane disruption, membrane protein and lipid oxidation, and 
DNA damage. Here we demonstrate that C. difficile detoxifies excess heme to 
achieve full virulence within the gastrointestinal lumen during infection, and 
that this detoxification occurs through the heme-responsive expression of the 
heme activated transporter system (HatRT). Heme-dependent transcriptional 
activation of hatRT was discovered through an RNA-sequencing analysis of C. 
difficile grown in the presence of a sub-toxic concentration of heme. HatRT is 
comprised of a TetR family transcriptional regulator (hatR) and a major 
facilitator superfamily transporter (hatT). Strains inactivated for hatR or hatT 
are more sensitive to heme toxicity than wild-type. HatR binds heme, which 
relieves the repression of the hatRT operon, whereas HatT functions as a heme 
efflux pump. In a murine model of CDI, a strain inactivated for hatT displayed 
lower pathogenicity in a toxin-independent manner. Taken together, these data 
suggest that HatR senses intracellular heme concentrations leading to increased 
expression of the hatRT operon and subsequent heme efflux by HatT during 
infection. These results describe a mechanism employed by C. difficile to 
relieve heme toxicity within the host, and set the stage for the development of 
therapeutic interventions to target this bacterial-specific system.
