Pathogenic Yersinia species deliver Yop effector proteins through a type III 
secretion system into host cells. Among these effectors, YopE and YopT are 
Rho-modifying toxins, which function to modulate host cell physiology and evade 
immune responses. YopE is a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) while YopT is a 
protease, and they inhibit RhoA by different modes of action. Modifications to 
RhoA are sensed by pyrin, which, once activated, assembles a caspase-1 
inflammasome, which generates cytokines such as interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and cell 
death by pyroptosis. In Yersinia-infected macrophages, YopE or YopT triggers 
inflammasome assembly only in the absence of another effector, YopM, which 
counteracts pyrin by keeping it inactive. The glucosyltransferase TcdB from 
Clostridium difficile, a well-studied RhoA-inactivating toxin, triggers 
activation of murine pyrin by dephosphorylation of Ser205 and Ser241. To 
determine if YopE or YopT triggers pyrin dephosphorylation, we infected 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-primed murine macrophages with ΔyopM Yersinia 
pseudotuberculosis strains expressing wild-type (wt) or YopE mutant variants or 
YopT. By immunoblotting pyrin after infection, we observed that wt YopE 
triggered dephosphorylation of Ser205 and inflammasome activation. Pyrin 
dephosphorylation was reduced if a YopE variant had a defect in stability or 
RhoA specificity but not membrane localization. We also observed that wt YopT 
triggered pyrin dephosphorylation but more slowly than YopE, suggesting that 
YopE is dominant in this process. Our findings provide evidence that 
RhoA-modifying toxins trigger activation of pyrin by a conserved 
dephosphorylation mechanism. In addition, by characterization of YopE and YopT, 
we show that different features of effectors, such as RhoA specificity, affect 
the efficiency of pyrin dephosphorylation.
