Clostridium (Clostridioides) difficile, a Gram-positive, anaerobic bacterium, is 
the leading single cause of nosocomial infections in the United States. A major 
risk factor for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is prior exposure to 
antibiotics, as they increase susceptibility to CDI by altering the membership 
of the microbial community enabling colonization. The importance of the gut 
microbiota in providing protection from CDI is underscored by the reported 80 to 
90% success rate of fecal microbial transplants in treating recurrent 
infections. Adaptive immunity, specifically humoral immunity, is also sufficient 
to protect from both acute and recurrent CDI. However, the role of the adaptive 
immune system in mediating clearance of C. difficile has yet to be resolved. 
Using murine models of CDI, we found that adaptive immunity is dispensable for 
clearance of C. difficile However, random forest analysis using only two members 
of the resident bacterial community correctly identified animals that would go 
on to clear the infection with 66.7% accuracy. These findings indicate that the 
indigenous gut microbiota independent of adaptive immunity facilitates clearance 
of C. difficile from the murine gastrointestinal tract.IMPORTANCE Clostridium 
difficile infection is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in hospitalized 
patients in the United States. Currently, the role of the adaptive immune 
response in modulating levels of C. difficile colonization is unresolved. This 
work suggests that the indigenous gut microbiota is a main factor that promotes 
clearance of C. difficile from the GI tract. Our results show that clearance of 
C. difficile can occur without contributions from the adaptive immune response. 
This study also has implications for the design of preclinical studies testing 
the efficacy of vaccines on clearance of bacterial pathogens, as inherent 
differences in the baseline community structure of animals may bias findings.
