OBJECTIVE: Faecal microbiota transplant (FMT) effectively treats recurrent 
Clostridioides difficile infection (rCDI), but its mechanisms of action remain 
poorly defined. Certain bile acids affect C. difficile germination or vegetative 
growth. We hypothesised that loss of gut microbiota-derived bile salt hydrolases 
(BSHs) predisposes to CDI by perturbing gut bile metabolism, and that BSH 
restitution is a key mediator of FMT's efficacy in treating the condition.
DESIGN: Using stool collected from patients and donors pre-FMT/post-FMT for 
rCDI, we performed 16S rRNA gene sequencing, ultra performance liquid 
chromatography mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS) bile acid profiling, BSH activity 
measurement, and qPCR of bsh/baiCD genes involved in bile metabolism. Human data 
were validated in C. difficile batch cultures and a C57BL/6 mouse model of rCDI.
RESULTS: From metataxonomics, pre-FMT stool demonstrated a reduced proportion of 
BSH-producing bacterial species compared with donors/post-FMT. Pre-FMT stool was 
enriched in taurocholic acid (TCA, a potent C. difficile germinant); TCA levels 
negatively correlated with key bacterial genera containing BSH-producing 
organisms. Post-FMT samples demonstrated recovered BSH activity and bsh/baiCD 
gene copy number compared with pretreatment (p<0.05). In batch cultures, 
supernatant from engineered bsh-expressing E. coli and naturally BSH-producing 
organisms (Bacteroides ovatus, Collinsella aerofaciens, Bacteroides vulgatus and 
Blautia obeum) reduced TCA-mediated C. difficile germination relative to culture 
supernatant of wild-type (BSH-negative) E. coli. C. difficile total viable 
counts were ~70% reduced in an rCDI mouse model after administration of E. coli 
expressing highly active BSH relative to mice administered BSH-negative E. coli 
(p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Restoration of gut BSH functionality contributes to the efficacy of 
FMT in treating rCDI.

Â© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.
