Clostridium difficile is a common cause of health-care acquired diarrhea, 
resulting in a spectrum of disease from mild diarrhea to life-threatening 
illness. Sixty Lactobacillus strains were screened for anti-C. difficile 
activity using a co-culture method. Based on their ability to inhibit C. 
difficile, L. gasseri APC 678 and L. rhamnosus DPC 6111 were selected for study 
in a murine model of C. difficile infection. L. gasseri ATCC 33323, was included 
as a control. It was established that, relative to control mice not fed 
Lactobacillus, feeding with L. gasseri APC 678 resulted in a significant 
reduction by day 7 (8-fold, p = 0.017) of viable C. difficile VPI 10463 in the 
feces of mice. In contrast, neither L. rhamnosus DPC 6111 nor L. gasseri ATCC 
33323 significantly reduced fecal C. difficile shedding. Sequencing of the cecal 
microbiota showed that in mice fed L. gasseri APC 678 there was a significant 
increase in bacterial diversity across a number of indices when compared to the 
control or other Lactobacillus-fed groups. There was no significant change in 
the relative abundance of Firmicutes or Bacteroidetes in the group fed L. 
gasseri APC 678 relative to the control, while the groups fed L. rhamnosus DPC 
6111 or L. gasseri ATCC 33323 showed a significant decrease in the relative 
abundance of Firmicutes (p = 0.002 and p = 0.019, respectively) and a 
significant increase in Bacteroidetes (p = 0.002 and p = 0.023, respectively). 
These results highlight the potential of L. gasseri APC 678 as a live 
therapeutic agent to target C. difficile infection.
