Clostridioides (formerly Clostridium) difficile is a Gram-positive anaerobic 
bacterial pathogen that causes severe gastrointestinal infection in humans. The 
current chemotherapeutic options are vastly inadequate, expensive and limited; 
this results in an exorbitant medical and financial burden. New, inexpensive 
chemotherapeutic treatments for C. difficile infection with improved efficacy 
are urgently needed. A streamlined synthetic pathway was developed to allow 
access to 38 novel mono- and di-cationic biaryl 1,2,3-triazolyl peptidomimetics 
with increased synthetic efficiency, aqueous solubility and enhanced 
antibacterial efficacy. The monocationic arginine derivative 28 was identified 
as a potent, Gram-positive selective antibacterial with MIC values of 4 μg/mL 
against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and 8 μg/mL against 
C. difficile. Furthermore, the dicationic bis-triazole analogue 50 was found to 
exhibit broad-spectrum activity with substantial Gram-negative efficacy against 
Acinetobacter baumannii (8 μg/mL), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (8 μg/mL) and 
Klebsiella pneumoniae (16 μg/mL); additionally, compound 50 displayed reduced 
haemolytic activity (<13%) in an in vitro haemolysis assay. Membrane-disruption 
assays were conducted on selected derivatives to confirm the membrane-active 
mechanism of action inherent to the synthesized amphiphilic compounds. A 
comparative solubility assay was developed and utilized to optimize the aqueous 
solubility of the compounds for in vivo studies. The biaryl peptidomimetics 28 
and 67 were found to exhibit significant efficacy in an in vivo murine model of 
C. difficile infection by reducing the severity and slowing the onset of 
disease.
