The in vitro activity of erythromycin and RU-28965 (a novel macrolide 
antimicrobial with improved pharmacokinetics) was determined against a variety 
of anaerobic bacteria in anaerobic atmospheres with and without added carbon 
dioxide. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) were determined using an 
antimicrobial incorporation technique in Wilkins-Chalgren agar (Oxoid, UK) 
containing saponinlysed horse blood to a final concentration of 10%. The 
inoculum used was approximately 10(4) colony forming units (cfu) contained in 10 
microliters Wilkins-Chalgren broth, which was applied to the surface of the agar 
plates using a multipoint inoculator. Following inoculation, plates were 
incubated for 48 h at 37 degrees C in an anaerobic atmosphere containing 10% 
carbon dioxide or in hydrogen alone. The MIC of each antimicrobial for each 
organism examined was determined as the lowest concentration of the 
antimicrobial which completely inhibited growth of the inoculum. The minimum 
concentrations required to inhibit the growth of 50% (MIC50) and 90% (MIC90) of 
the bacteria examined were also determined. The MICs of erythromycin and 
RU-28965 for isolates of the Bacteroides fragilis group, B. bivius and 
Fusobacterium spp. were generally 10-100 times greater when determined in the 
presence of carbon dioxide than when determined in hydrogen alone. The MICs of 
erythromycin and RU-28965 for B. melaninogenicus, Peptococcus spp., 
Peptostreptococcus spp., Clostridium perfringens, Cl. difficile and 
Propionibacterium acnes were less affected by the presence of carbon dioxide.
