Animals such as domestic dogs and zoo animals reside in close proximity to 
humans and could contribute to the dissemination of Clostridioides difficile 
spores which are common in the community environment. The purpose of this study 
was to assess C. difficile colonization in domestic dogs attending a day 
boarding facility and zoo animals receiving systemic antibiotics. Stool samples 
and paw swabs were collected from dogs who attended a day boarding facility. 
Stool samples were also collected from zoo animals starting systemic 
antibiotics. Finally, environmental samples were collected from nearby public 
parks. Stool samples and swabs were incubated anaerobically in enrichment broth 
for C. difficile growth, PCR was done to confirm presence of toxin genes, and 
PCR ribotyping was performed for strain characterization. During the study 
period, 136 dog stool samples were obtained, the paws of 16 dogs were swabbed, 
and 250 environmental swabs from surrounding public parks were obtained. 
Twenty-three of 136 dog stool samples (17%) and 9 of 16 dog paws sampled (56%) 
grew toxigenic C. difficile. One hundred and four stool samples from 49 zoo 
animals were collected of which 19 (18%) grew toxigenic C. difficile. Rates of 
toxigenic C. difficile colonization increased significantly during antibiotic 
therapy (33%) and then returned to baseline during the follow-up (11%) period 
(p = 0.019). Fifty-five of 250 environmental swabs from public parks (22%) grew 
toxigenic C. difficile. Ribotypes associated with human disease including 106 
and 014-020 were isolated from all sources. This study demonstrated a high rate 
of toxigenic C. difficile colonization in domestic dogs and zoo animals with 
ribotypes similar to those causing human disease. These results demonstrate the 
relationship between humans, animals, and the environment in the dissemination 
of spores.
