In people, colonization with Clostridioides difficile, the leading cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, has been shown to be associated with distinct 
gut microbial features, including reduced bacterial community diversity and 
depletion of key taxa. In dogs, the gut microbiota features that define C. 
difficile colonization are less well understood. We sought to define the gut 
microbiota features associated with C. difficile colonization in puppies, a 
population where the prevalence of C. difficile has been shown to be elevated, 
and to define the effect of puppy age and litter upon these features and C. 
difficile risk. We collected fecal samples from weaned (n = 27) and unweaned (n 
= 74) puppies from 13 litters and analyzed the effects of colonization status, 
age and litter on microbial diversity using linear mixed effects models. 
Colonization with C. difficile was significantly associated with younger age, 
and colonized puppies had significantly decreased bacterial community diversity 
and differentially abundant taxa compared to non-colonized puppies, even when 
adjusting for age. C. difficile colonization remained associated with decreased 
bacterial community diversity, but the association did not reach statistical 
significance in a mixed effects model incorporating litter as a random effect. 
Even though litter explained a greater proportion (67%) of the variability in 
microbial diversity than colonization status, we nevertheless observed 
heterogeneity in gut microbial community diversity and colonization status 
within more than half of the litters, suggesting that the gut microbiota 
contributes to colonization resistance against C. difficile. The colonization of 
puppies with C. difficile has important implications for the potential zoonotic 
transfer of this organism to people. The identified associations point to 
mechanisms by which C. difficile colonization may be reduced.
