BACKGROUND: Clostridioides difficile (previously Clostridium difficile) is the 
leading cause of nosocomial, antibiotic-associated diarrhoea worldwide. 
Currently, the gold standard of treatment for C. difficile infection (CDI) is 
vancomycin or metronidazole, although these antibiotics also perturb the 
protective resident microbiota, often resulting in disease relapse. Thus, an 
urgent need remains for the development of new treatment strategies. Auranofin 
is an FDA-approved oral antirheumatic drug that was previously shown to inhibit 
C. difficile vegetative cell growth, toxin production and spore production in 
vitro.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy of auranofin as a CDI therapeutic by 
examining the effect of treatment on toxin and spore production in vitro and in 
vivo, and on disease outcomes in mice.
METHODS: C. difficile cultures were treated with auranofin and examined for 
effects on sporulation and toxin production by sporulation assay and ELISA, 
respectively. Mice were pretreated with auranofin prior to infection with C. 
difficile and monitored for physiological conditions, survival and gut damage 
compared with control animals. Faeces from mice were analysed to determine 
whether auranofin reduces sporulation and toxin production in vivo.
RESULTS: Auranofin significantly reduces sporulation and toxin production under 
in vitro conditions and in infected mice in vivo. Mice treated with auranofin 
lost less weight, displayed a significant increase in survival rates and had 
significantly less toxin-mediated damage in their colon and caecum compared with 
control mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Auranofin shows promise as a prospective therapeutic option for C. 
difficile infections.

Â© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
