Infections with Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) have 
increased in incidence, morbidity, and mortality over the past decade. 
Preventing infections is becoming increasingly important, as frontline 
antibiotics become less effective and frequently induce recurrence by disrupting 
intestinal microbiota. The clinically most advanced vaccine approaches prevent 
symptoms once C. difficile infection is established by inducing immunity to 
secreted clostridial cytotoxins. However, they do not inhibit bacterial 
colonization and thereby favor asymptomatic carriage. Synthetic oligosaccharides 
resembling the C. difficile surface glycans PS-I, PS-II, and PS-III are 
immunogenic and serve as basis for colonization-preventing vaccines. Here, we 
demonstrate that glycoconjugate vaccine candidates based on synthetic 
oligosaccharides protected mice from infections with two different C. difficile 
strains. Four synthetic antigens, ranging in size from disaccharides to 
hexasaccharides, were conjugated to CRM197, which is a carrier protein used in 
commercial vaccines. The vaccine candidates induced glycan-specific antibodies 
in mice and substantially limited C. difficile colonization and colitis after 
experimental infection. The glycoconjugates ameliorated intestinal pathology 
more substantially than a toxin-targeting vaccine. Colonization of the gut by C. 
difficile was selectively inhibited while intestinal microbiota remained 
preserved. Passive transfer experiments with anti-PS-I serum revealed that 
protection is mediated by specific antiglycan antibodies; however, cell-mediated 
immunity likely also contributed to protection in vivo. Thus, glycoconjugate 
vaccines against C. difficile are a complementary approach to toxin-targeting 
strategies and are advancing through preclinical work.
