Overgrowth of enteric clostridia in dysbiosis in horses with colic is presumed 
but scarcely investigated. The objective was to provide prevalence data of 
Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens in horses with and without 
gastrointestinal disease in Switzerland, and investigate microbiota differences 
between C. difficile shedders and non-shedders. Fecal samples were taken from 
healthy horses (n = 103), horses with colic (n = 98) and horses with diarrhea 
(n = 151). Colic horses were sampled on three days. Selective enrichment culture 
and molecular typing for C. difficile and C. perfringens was performed. 
Microbiota differences between horses with colic shedding (n = 7) and not 
shedding (n = 7) C. difficile were assessed using metagenomic sequencing. The 
cumulative prevalence (19% C. difficile; 16% C. perfringens) was higher compared 
to single day samples (1-10% C. difficile; 3-8% C. perfringens, all p < 0.003). 
Horses with colic shed significantly more C. difficile (p < 0.001) but not C. 
perfringens (p = 0.09) compared to healthy horses. Prevalence in horses with 
diarrhea was 8% for both Clostridium species. There were no significant 
microbiota differences between C. difficile shedders and non-shedders with 
regards to relative abundance on any phylogenetic level, and alpha diversity. 
Limited differences were seen on LEfSE analysis and in beta diversity indices. 
Multiple fecal samples should be taken when investigating shedding of enteric 
clostridia. As horses with colic shed more enteric clostridia compared to 
healthy horses special biosecurity protocols for horses with colic should be 
considered in hospitals. Differences in microbiota composition between C. 
difficile shedders and non-shedders were limited. Further studies on the role of 
dysbiosis in C. difficile are needed.
