Feeding raw-meat-based diets to companion animals has become a widespread 
practice, and many owners are now accustomed to buying frozen ingredients 
online. The goals of this study were to assess the microbiological quality of 
raw-meat dog foods obtained from specialized websites and to evaluate the 
effects of storage at different temperatures for a few days. Twenty-nine raw dog 
food products were processed for quantitative bacteriology (i.e. total viable 
count, TVC; Escherichia coli; faecal coliforms, FC) and sulphite-reducing 
clostridia, and analysed for the presence of Salmonella spp., Listeria 
monocytogenes, Yersinia enterocolitica and Clostridium difficile. Every sample 
was examined right after the delivery (T0), after 24 to 48 hr and after 72 hr, 
both at 2°C and 7°C. At T0, the mean score for the TVC was 5.9 × 106  cfu/g 
(SD = 4.8 × 107  cfu/g), while those for E. coli and FC were 1.1 × 104  cfu/g 
(SD = 2.5 × 105  cfu/g) and 3.3 × 103  cfu/g (SD = 6.5 × 104  cfu/g) 
respectively. The samples stored at 2°C had a significant increase of all 
parameters (TVC: p < .01; E. coli: p = .03; FC: p = .04) through time. 
Noteworthy differences between the analyses performed at 2°C and 7°C were found 
for TVC (p < .01), being the samples considerably more contaminated at higher 
temperatures. No sample tested positive for Salmonella spp., while 
L. monocytogenes was isolated from 19 products, Y. enterocolitica from three 
products and Clostridium perfringens and C. difficile from four and six products 
respectively. The microbiological quality of raw-meat dog foods sold online 
appears to be poor, carrying considerable amounts of potentially zoonotic 
bacteria and reaching greater levels of bacterial contaminations if not kept at 
proper refrigeration temperatures and fed soon after defrosting.
