Susceptibility of patients to antibiotic-associated C. difficile disease is 
intimately associated with specific changes to gut microbiome composition. In 
particular, loss of microbes that modify bile salt acids (BSA) play a central 
role; primary bile acids stimulate spore germination whilst secondary bile acids 
limit C. difficile vegetative growth. To determine the relative contribution of 
bile salt (BS) metabolism on C. difficile disease severity, we treated mice with 
three combinations of antibiotics prior to infection. Mice given clindamycin 
alone became colonized but displayed no tissue pathology while severe disease, 
exemplified by weight loss and inflammatory tissue damage occurred in animals 
given a combination of five antibiotics and clindamycin. Animals given only the 
five antibiotic cocktails showed only transient colonization and no disease. C. 
difficile colonization was associated with a reduction in bacterial diversity, 
an inability to amplify bile salt hydrolase (BSH) sequences from fecal DNA and a 
relative increase in primary bile acids (pBA) in cecal lavages from infected 
mice. Further, the link between BSA modification and the microbiome was 
confirmed by the isolation of strains of Lactobacillus murinus that modified 
primary bile acids in vitro, thus preventing C. difficile germination. 
Interestingly, BSH activity did not correlate with disease severity which 
appeared linked to alternations in mucin, which may indirectly lead to increased 
exposure of the epithelial surface to inflammatory signals. These data confirm 
the role of microbial metabolic activity in protection of the gut and highlights 
the need for greater understanding the function of bacterial communities in 
disease prevention.
