Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is an effective therapy for recurrent 
Clostridioides difficile infection (rCDI) and is also considered a potential 
treatment for a wide range of intestinal and systemic diseases. FMT corrects the 
microbial dysbiosis associated with rCDI, and the engraftment of donor 
microbiota is likely to play a key role in treatment efficacy. For disease 
indications other than rCDI, FMT treatment efficacy has been moderate. This may 
be partly due to stronger resilience of resident host microbiota in patients who 
do not suffer from rCDI. In rCDI, patients typically have undergone several 
antibiotic treatments prior to FMT, depleting the microbiota. In this study, we 
addressed the effect of broad-spectrum antibiotics (Ab) as a pre-treatment to 
FMT on the engraftment of donor microbiota in recipients. We conducted a 
pre-clinical study of FMT between two healthy mouse strains, Balb/c as donors 
and C57BL/6 as recipients, to perform FMT within the same species and to mimic 
interindividual FMT between human donors and patients. Microbiota composition 
was assessed with high-throughput 16S rDNA amplicon sequencing. The microbiota 
of Balb/c and C57BL/6 mice differed significantly, which allowed for the 
assessment of microbiota transplantation from the donor strain to the recipient. 
Our results showed that Ab-treatment depleted microbiota in C57BL/6 recipient 
mice prior to FMT. The diversity of microbiota did not recover spontaneously to 
baseline levels during 8 weeks after Ab-treatment, but was restored already at 2 
weeks in mice receiving FMT. Interestingly, pre-treatment with antibiotics prior 
to FMT did not increase the overall similarity of the recipient's microbiota to 
that of the donor's, as compared with mice receiving FMT without Ab-treatment. 
Pre-treatment with Ab improved the establishment of only a few donor-derived 
taxa, such as Bifidobacterium, in the recipients, thus having a minor effect on 
the engraftment of donor microbiota in FMT. In conclusion, pre-treatment with 
broad-spectrum antibiotics did not improve the overall engraftment of donor 
microbiota, but did improve the engraftment of specific taxa. These results may 
inform future therapeutic studies of FMT.

Copyright Â© 2019 Freitag, Hartikainen, Jouhten, Sahl, Meri, Anttila, Mattila, 
Arkkila, Jalanka and Satokari.
