The increased incidence of Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) and the 
emergence of highly virulent types highlight the need of microbiological 
characterization to gain insight CDI epidemiological changes. This paper, 
reporting data obtained by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità Central Laboratory 
Service for C. difficile (ISS-CLSCD) in 2006-2016, provides a first long-term 
microbiological analysis of human and animal C. difficile strains circulating in 
Italy. The number of human isolates analyzed by ISS-CLSCD significantly 
increased over the time (170 in 2006-2011 vs 661 in 2012-2016). Independently 
from the year of isolation, 42% of the clinical isolates belonged to the 
PCR-ribotype (RT) 018-lineage (RT 018, RT 607, RT 541, PR07661 and PR14328), 
with RT 018 and RT 607 grouping the majority of isolates. This lineage was 
significantly associated to CDIs occurred in the General Medicine Units, Clinic 
Units or Long-Term Care Facilities, while it was rarely found in pediatric 
patients. Although the percentage of isolates positive for the binary toxin 
(CDT) was stable during the study (20%), several CDT-positive RTs emerged in 
2012-2016, including RT 027. In total, 32 RTs overlapped between animals and 
humans and six of these RTs were non-toxigenic. The two lineages prevalent in 
animals, the RT 078-lineage and the RT 569-lineage (RT 569, RT 049, RT 056 and 
RT 727), were also found in humans, while the RT 018-lineage was rarely detected 
in animals, suggesting that it is prevalently associated to human infections. 
Sixty-two percent of clinical isolates showed a multidrug-resistance (MDR) 
phenotype, with resistance to rifampicin characterizing successful RTs. A MDR 
phenotype was also observed in 18% of animal isolates, in particular from dogs, 
supporting animals as potential reservoirs of resistant C. difficile strains. 
Interestingly, multiple resistances were observed in both human and animal 
non-toxigenic isolates suggesting their contribution to antibiotic resistance 
spread among C. difficile population. All these data indicate that CDI is an 
issue of growing concern in Italy, highlighting the need for a standardized 
surveillance in our Country and an interdisciplinary approach to deal 
successfully with this infection.
