Antibiotic treatment of patients undergoing complex medical treatments can 
deplete commensal bacterial strains from the intestinal microbiota, thereby 
reducing colonization resistance against a wide range of antibiotic-resistant 
pathogens. Loss of colonization resistance can lead to marked expansion of 
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VRE), Klebsiella pneumoniae, and 
Escherichia coli in the intestinal lumen, predisposing patients to bloodstream 
invasion and sepsis. The impact of intestinal domination by these 
antibiotic-resistant pathogens on mucosal immune defenses and epithelial and 
mucin-mediated barrier integrity is unclear. We used a mouse model to study the 
impact of intestinal domination by antibiotic-resistant bacterial species and 
strains on the colonic mucosa. Intestinal colonization with K. pneumoniae, 
Proteus mirabilis, or Enterobacter cloacae promoted greater recruitment of 
neutrophils to the colonic mucosa. To test the hypothesis that the residual 
microbiota influences the severity of colitis caused by infection with 
Clostridioides difficile, we coinfected mice that were colonized with 
ampicillin-resistant bacteria with a virulent strain of C. difficile and 
monitored colonization and pathogenesis. Despite the compositional differences 
in the gut microbiota, the severity of C. difficile infection (CDI) and 
mortality did not differ significantly between mice colonized with different 
ampicillin-resistant bacterial species. Our results suggest that the virulence 
mechanisms enabling CDI and epithelial destruction outweigh the relatively minor 
impact of less-virulent antibiotic-resistant intestinal bacteria on the outcome 
of CDI.
