The anaerobic bacterium Clostridioides difficile is the leading cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea that can culminate in life-threating colitis. 
During the C. difficile infection (CDI), C. difficile produces toxins that 
generate the clinical symptoms of the disease, and produce spores, which persist 
in the host during antibiotic treatment and can cause recurrent CDI (R-CDI). In 
this work, we aimed to compare three antibiotic regimens in the susceptibility 
of mice to CDI and R-CDI (i.e., antibiotic cocktail followed by clindamycin, 5 
days of cefoperazone and 10 days of cefoperazone) with three different 
C. difficile isolates (i.e., strains 630; R20291, and VPI 10463). We observed 
that the severity of the clinical symptoms of CDI and R-CDI was dependent on the 
antibiotic treatment used to induce C. difficile-susceptibility, and that the 
three strains generated a different onset to diarrhea and weight loss in mice 
that were administrated with the same antibiotic treatment and which differed in 
comparison to the effect previously reported by other research groups. Our 
results suggest that, in our experimental conditions, in those animals treated 
with antibiotic cocktail followed by clindamycin, infection with strain R20291 
had the highest diarrhea manifestation in comparison to strains 630 and VPI 
10463. In animals treated with cefoperazone for 5 days, infection with strains 
R20291 or 630 had the highest diarrhea manifestation in comparison to VPI 10463, 
while in animals treated with cefoperazone for 10 days, infection with strain 
R20291 or VPI 10463, but not 630, had the highest diarrhea manifestation.
