The complex bacterial populations that constitute the gut microbiota can harbor 
antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs), including those encoding Î²-lactamase enzymes 
(BLA), which degrade commonly prescribed antibiotics such as ampicillin. The 
prevalence of such genes in commensal bacteria has been increased in recent 
years by the wide use of antibiotics in human populations and in livestock. 
While transfer of ARGs between bacterial species has well-established dramatic 
public health implications, these genes can also function in trans within 
bacterial consortia, where antibiotic-resistant bacteria can provide 
antibiotic-sensitive neighbors with leaky protection from drugs, as shown both 
in vitro and in vivo, in models of lung and subcutaneous coinfection. However, 
whether the expression of ARGs by harmless commensal bacterial species can 
destroy antibiotics in the intestinal lumen and shield antibiotic-sensitive 
pathogens is unknown. To address this question, we colonized germfree or 
wild-type mice with a model intestinal commensal strain of Escherichia coli that 
produces either functional or defective BLA. Mice were subsequently infected 
with Listeria monocytogenes or Clostridioides difficile, followed by treatment 
with oral ampicillin. The production of functional BLA by commensal E. coli 
markedly reduced clearance of these pathogens and enhanced systemic 
dissemination during ampicillin treatment. Pathogen resistance was independent 
of ARG acquisition via horizontal gene transfer but instead relied on antibiotic 
degradation in the intestinal lumen by BLA. We conclude that commensal bacteria 
that have acquired ARGs can mediate shielding of pathogens from the bactericidal 
effects of antibiotics.
