Abstract: The BclA3 glycoprotein is a major component of the exosporangial layer 
of Clostridium difficile spores and in this study we demonstrate that this 
glycoprotein is a major spore surface associated antigen. Here, we confirm the 
role of SgtA glycosyltransferase (SgtA GT) in BclA3 glycosylation and 
recapitulate this process by expressing and purifying SgtA GT fused to MalE, the 
maltose binding protein from Escherichia coli. In vitro assays using the 
recombinant enzyme and BclA3 synthetic peptides demonstrated that SgtA GT was 
responsible for the addition of Î²-O-linked GlcNAc to threonine residues of each 
synthetic peptide. These peptide sequences were selected from the central, 
collagen repeat region of the BclA3 protein. Following optimization of SgtA GT 
activity, we generated sufficient glycopeptide (10 mg) to allow conjugation to 
KLH (keyhole limpet hemocyanin) protein. Glycosylated and unglycosylated 
versions of these conjugates were then used as antigens to immunize rabbits and 
mice. Immune responses to each of the conjugates were examined by Enzyme Linked 
Immunosorbent Assay ELISA. Additionally, the BclA3 conjugated peptide and 
glycopeptide were used as antigens in an ELISA assay with serum raised against 
formalin-killed spores. Only the glycopeptide was recognized by anti-spore 
polyclonal immune serum demonstrating that the glycan moiety is a predominant 
spore-associated surface antigen. To determine whether antibodies to these 
peptides could modify persistence of spores within the gut, animals immunized 
intranasally with either the KLH-glycopeptide or KLH-peptide conjugate in the 
presence of cholera toxin, were challenged with R20291 spores. Although specific 
antibodies were raised to both antigens, immunization did not provide any 
protection against acute or recurrent disease.
