Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is associated with increasing morbidity 
and mortality posing an urgent threat to public health. Recurrence of CDI after 
successful treatment with antibiotics is high, thus necessitating discovery of 
novel therapeutics against this enteric pathogen. Administration of the 
secondary bile acid ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA; ursodiol) inhibits the life 
cycles of various strains of C. difficile in vitro, suggesting that the 
FDA-approved formulation of UDCA, known as ursodiol, may be able to restore 
colonization resistance against C. difficile in vivo However, the mechanism(s) 
by which ursodiol is able to restore colonization resistance against C. 
difficile remains unknown. Here, we confirmed that ursodiol inhibits C. 
difficile R20291 spore germination and outgrowth, growth, and toxin activity in 
a dose-dependent manner in vitro In a murine model of CDI, exogenous 
administration of ursodiol resulted in significant alterations in the bile acid 
metabolome with little to no changes in gut microbial community structure. 
Ursodiol pretreatment resulted in attenuation of CDI pathogenesis early in the 
course of disease, which coincided with alterations in the cecal and colonic 
inflammatory transcriptome, bile acid-activated receptors nuclear farnesoid X 
receptor (FXR) and transmembrane G-protein-coupled membrane receptor 5 (TGR5), 
which are able to modulate the innate immune response through signaling pathways 
such as NF-ÎºB. Although ursodiol pretreatment did not result in a consistent 
decrease in the C. difficile life cycle in vivo, it was able to attenuate an 
overly robust inflammatory response that is detrimental to the host during CDI. 
Ursodiol remains a viable nonantibiotic treatment and/or prevention strategy 
against CDI. Likewise, modulation of the host innate immune response via bile 
acid-activated receptors FXR and TGR5 represents a new potential treatment 
strategy for patients with CDI.
