BACKGROUND: It has been performed worldwidely to explore the potential of 
animals that might be a reservoir for community associated human infections of 
Clostridioides difficile. Several genetically undistinguished PCR ribotypes of 
C. difficile from animals and human have been reported, illustrating potential 
transmission of C. difficile between them. Pig and calf were considered as the 
main origins of C. difficile with predominant RT078 and RT033, respectively. As 
more investigations involved, great diversity of molecular types from pig and 
calf were reported in Europe, North American and Australia. However, there were 
quite limited research on C. difficile isolates from meat animals in China, 
leading to non-comprehensive understanding of molecular epidemiology of C. 
difficile in China.
RESULTS: A total of 55 C. difficile were isolated from 953 animal stool samples, 
within which 51 strains were from newborn dairy calf less than 7â€‰days in 
Shandong Province. These isolates were divided into 3 STs and 6 RTs, of which 
ST11/RT126 was predominant type, and responsible for majority antibiotic 
resistance isolates. All the isolates were resistant to at least one tested 
antibiotics, however, only two multidrug resistant (MDR) isolates were 
identified. Furthermore, erythromycin (ERY) and clindamycin (CLI) were the two 
main resistant antibiotics. None of the isolates were resistant to vancomycin 
(VAN), metronidazole (MTZ), tetracycline (TET), and rifampin (RIF).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we analyzed the prevalence, molecular characters and 
antibiotic resistance of C. difficile from calf, sheep, chicken, and pig in 
China. Some unique features were found here: first, RT126 not RT078 were the 
dominant type from baby calf, and none isolates were got from pig; second, on 
the whole, isolates from animals display relative lower resistant rate to these 
11 tested antibiotics, compared with isolates from human in China in our 
previous report. Our study helps to deep understanding the situation of C. 
difficile from economic animals in China, and to further study the potential 
transmission of C. difficile between meat animals and human.
