The present study aimed to explore the motivations of Brazilian dog owners and 
their knowledge about the risks related to raw meat-based diets (RMBD) as well 
as to evaluate important enteropathogens such as Salmonella spp., C. 
perfringens, and C. difficile, in feces of dogs fed different diets. The 
majority of the pet owners (69.3%) reported to have chosen this diet for their 
dogs, considering it to be more "natural". A large number of owners declared 
that RMBD do not pose health risks for their animals (87.9%) or humans (98.8%), 
even though almost one third of the respondents (34.8%) declared having at least 
one individual at high risk of infection in contact with RMBD-fed dogs. Stool 
samples from 46 RMBD-fed dogs and 192 dogs fed commercial dry feed were 
collected. The present study revealed that dogs fed raw meat diets were almost 
30 times more likely to be positive for Salmonella spp. than dogs on a 
conventional diet. Some of the serovars detected were commonly associated with 
human salmonellosis, such as S. Typhimurium and S. Saintpaul, and were multidrug 
resistant. RMBD-fed dogs were more likely to be positive for C. perfringens type 
A (p = 0.008) and one C. perfringens type F was isolated from these animals. Two 
toxigenic strains (4.3%) of C. difficile were isolated only from raw meat-fed 
dogs, all of which were under antibiotic therapy. These toxigenic C. difficile 
isolates were classified as RT106/ST54 and RT600/ST149, previously associated 
with infection in dogs and humans. The present work revealed that the owners 
have a tendency to ignore or are unaware of the risks associated with raw meat 
diets for dogs. Also, the higher fecal shedding of important enteropathogens in 
dogs fed RMBD suggests that this diet poses a risk for the animals and the 
people in contact with them.
