Clostridioides (formerly Clostridium) difficile is the most common cause of 
hospital-acquired infection, and advanced age is a risk factor for C. difficile 
infection. Disruption of the intestinal microbiota and immune responses 
contribute to host susceptibility and severity of C. difficile infection. 
However, the specific impact of aging on immune responses during C. difficile 
infection remains to be well described. This study explores the effect of age on 
cellular and cytokine immune responses during C. difficile infection. Young mice 
(2 to 3 months old) and aged mice (22 to 28 months old) were rendered 
susceptible to C. difficile infection with the antibiotic cefoperazone and then 
infected with C. difficile strains with varied disease-causing potentials. We 
observe that the host age and the infecting C. difficile strain influenced the 
severity of disease associated with infection. Tissue-specific CD45+ immune cell 
responses occurred at the time of peak disease severity in the ceca and colons 
of all mice infected with a high-virulence strain of C. difficile; however, 
significant deficits in intestinal neutrophils and eosinophils were detected in 
aged mice, with a corresponding decrease in circulating CXCL1, an important 
neutrophil recruiter and activator. Interestingly, this lack of intestinal 
granulocyte response in aged mice during severe C. difficile infection was 
accompanied by a simultaneous increase in circulating white blood cells, 
granulocytes, and interleukin 17A (IL-17A). These findings demonstrate that 
age-related alterations in neutrophils and eosinophils and systemic cytokine and 
chemokine responses are associated with severe C. difficile infection and 
support a key role for intestinal eosinophils in mitigating C. 
difficile-mediated disease severity.
