Placing a nasogastric tube can be a life-saving act for a horse but is 
considered an occupational hazard for veterinarians. An online questionnaire was 
performed to assess and specify potential risks. 123 equine veterinarians 
completed the survey, and the majority admitted using the mouth to handle the 
end of the nasogastric tube (sucking or blowing air) and having accidentally 
swallowed or aspirated stomach content or medications. This can potentially lead 
to aspiration pneumonia or pneumonitis. Mineral oil seems to be especially 
dangerous as aspiration may be asymptomatic at the beginning and lipoid 
pneumonitis may develop. Furthermore, 60% of responders would also handle the 
tube with their mouth if the horse was presented with fever and diarrhea or 
reflux formation, which might be affected by Salmonella sp. or Clostridium 
difficile producing toxins. The fact that nasogastric tubes are rarely being 
disinfected increases the risk of infection. 50% of veterinarians would use 
their mouth to suck or blow air into the tube during nasogastric intubation, 
even if the patient was presented with suspected poisoning. Rodenticide zinc 
phosphide is particularly dangerous as its breakdown product is a highly toxic 
gas. Inhalation leads to serious symptoms in humans, including pulmonary edema 
and neurological signs. Alternatives to mouth use (lavage, big syringe, or 
suction pump) when passing a tube should be considered, especially if a patient 
is presented with duodenitis-proximal jejunitis, diarrhea, or suspected 
poisoning. Awareness needs to be raised among veterinarians that nasogastric 
intubation is an extremely hazardous occupational practice.
