Clostridioides difficile infections (CDIs) are predominantly a 
healthcare-associated illness in developed countries, with the majority of cases 
being elderly and hospitalize patients who used antibiotic therapy. Recently, 
the incidence of community-associated CDIs (CA-CDIs) in younger patients without 
a previous history of hospitalization or antibiotic treatment has been 
increasing globally. C. difficile is sometimes found in the intestine of many 
animals, such as pigs, calves, and dogs. Food products such as retail meat 
products and vegetables sometimes contain C. difficile. C. difficile has also 
been isolated from several environments such as compost manure, rivers, and 
soils. Yet, direct transmission of C. difficile from animals, food products, and 
environments to humans has not been proven, although these strains have similar 
molecular characteristics. Therefore, it has been suggested that there is a 
relationship between CA-CDIs and C. difficile from animals, food products, and 
the environment. To clarify the importance of the presence of C. difficile in 
several sources, characterization of C. difficile in these sources is required. 
However, the epidemiology of C. difficile in animals, food products, and the 
environment is not well studied in Japan. This review summarizes recent trends 
of CDIs and compares the molecular characteristics of C. difficile in Japanese 
animals, food products, and the environment. The prevalence trends of 
C. difficile in Japan are similar to those in the rest of the world. Therefore, 
I recommend using a One Health approach to CDI surveillance, monitoring, and 
control.

Copyright © 2020 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy and The Japanese Association 
for Infectious Diseases. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
