Clostridioides difficile is an enteric pathogen that can cause significant 
clinical disease in both humans and animals. However, clinical disease arises 
most commonly after treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics. The organism's 
ability to cause naturally occurring disease in mice is rare, and little is 
known about its clinical significance in highly immunocompromised mice. We 
report on 2 outbreaks of diarrhea associated with C. difficile in mice. In 
outbreak 1, 182 of approximately 2, 400 NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) 
and related strains of mice became clinically ill after cessation of a 14-d 
course of 0.12% amoxicillin feed to control an increase in clinical signs 
associated with Corynebacterium bovis infection. Most mice had been engrafted 
with human tumors; the remainder were experimentally na√Øve. Affected animals 
exhibited 1 of 3 clinical syndromes: 1) peracute death; 2) severe diarrhea 
leading to euthanasia or death; or 3) mild to moderate diarrhea followed by 
recovery. A given cage could contain both affected and unaffected mice. Outbreak 
2 involved a small breeding colony (approximately 50 mice) of NOD. 
CB17-Prkdcscid/NCrCrl (NOD-scid) mice that had not received antibiotics or 
experimental manipulations. In both outbreaks, C. difficile was isolated, and 
toxins A and B were detected in intestinal content or feces. Histopathologic 
lesions highly suggestive of C. difficile enterotoxemia included 
fibrinonecrotizing and neutrophilic typhlocolitis with characteristic 'volcano' 
erosions or pseudomembrane formation. Genomic analysis of 4 isolates (3 from 
outbreak 1 and 1 from outbreak 2) revealed that these isolates were closely 
related to a pathogenic human isolate, CD 196. To our knowledge, this report is 
the first to describe naturally occurring outbreaks of C. difficile-associated 
typhlocolitis with significant morbidity and mortality in highly 
immunocompromised strains of mice.
