Corynebacterium bovis is the causative agent of Corynebacterium-associated 
hyperkeratosis in immunocompromised mice. The resulting skin pathology can be 
profound and can be associated with severe wasting, making the animals 
unsuitable for research. Although the administration of antibiotics is effective 
in resolving clinical symptoms, antibiotics do not eradicate the offending 
bacterium. Furthermore, antibiotic use may be contraindicated as it can affect 
tumor growth and is associated with Clostridioides difficile enterotoxemia in 
highly immunocompromised murine strains. Lysins, which are lytic enzymes 
obtained from bacteriophages, are novel antimicrobial agents for treating 
bacterial diseases. The advantage of lysins are its target specificity, with 
minimal off-target complications that could affect the host or the biology of 
the engrafted tumor. The aim of this study was to identify lysins active against 
C. bovis. Chemical activation of latent prophages by using mitomycin C in 3 C. 
bovis isolates did not cause bacteriophage induction as determined through 
plaque assays and transmission electron microscopy. As an alternative approach, 
8 lysins associated with other bacterial species, including those from the 
closely related species C. falsenii, were tested for their lytic action against 
C. bovis but were unsuccessful. These findings were congruent with the 
previously reported genomic analysis of 21 C. bovis isolates, which failed to 
reveal bacteriophage sequences by using the PHAST and PHASTER web server tools. 
From these results, we suggest C. bovis is among those rare bacterial species 
devoid of lysogenic bacteriophages, thus making the identification of C. 
bovis-specific lysins more challenging. However, C. bovis may be a useful model 
organism for studying the effects of antiphage systems.
