BACKGROUND: Zika virus (ZIKV) infection is a global health problem, and its 
complications, including congenital Zika syndrome and Guillain-Barr√© syndrome, 
constitute a continued threat to humans. Unfortunately, effective therapeutics 
against ZIKV infection are not available thus far.
METHODS: We screened the compounds collection consisting of 1789 FDA-approved 
drugs by a computational docking method to obtain anti-ZIKV candidate compounds 
targeting ZIKV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). SPR (BIAcore) assay was 
employed to demonstrate the candidate compounds' direct binding to ZIKV RdRp, 
and polymerase activity assay was used to determine the inhibitory effect on 
ZIKV RdRp-catalyzed RNA synthesis. The antiviral effects on ZIKV in vitro and in 
vivo were detected in infected cultured cells and in Ifnar1-/- mice infected by 
ZIKV virus using plaque assay, western blotting, tissue immunofluorescence, and 
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Here, we report that a first-in-class macrocyclic antibiotic, which has 
been clinically used to treat Clostridium difficile infection, fidaxomicin, 
potently inhibits ZIKV replication in vitro and in vivo. Our data showed that 
fidaxomicin was effective against African and Asian lineage ZIKV in a wide 
variety of cell lines of various tissue origins, and prominently suppressed ZIKV 
infection and significantly improved survival of infected mice. In addition, 
fidaxomicin treatment reduced the virus load in the brains and testes, and 
alleviated ZIKV-associated pathological damages, such as paralysis, hunching, 
and neuronal necrosis in the cerebra. Furthermore, our mechanistic study showed 
that fidaxomicin directly bound ZIKV NS5 protein and inhibited the RNA 
synthesis-catalyzing activity of ZIKV RdRp.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that fidaxomicin may represent an effective 
anti-ZIKV agent. In the light that fidaxomicin is already a clinically used 
drug, there might be a promising prospect in the development of fidaxomicin to 
be an antiviral therapeutic.
