The germination of ingested spores is often a necessary first step required for 
enabling bacterial outgrowth and host colonization, as in the case of 
Clostridioides difficile (C. difficile) infection. Spore germination rate in the 
colon depends on microbiota composition and its level of disruption by 
antibiotic treatment since secretions by commensal bacteria modulate primary to 
secondary bile salt levels to control germination. Assessment of C. difficile 
spore germination typically requires measurement of colony-forming units, which 
is labor intensive and takes at least 24 h to perform but is regularly required 
due to the high recurrence rates of nosocomial antibiotic-associated diarrhea. 
We present a rapid method to assess spore germination by using high throughput 
single-cell impedance cytometry (>300 events/s) to quantify live bacterial 
cells, by gating for their characteristic electrophysiology versus spores, so 
that germination can be assessed after just 4 h of culture at a detection limit 
of ~100 live cells per 50 μL sample. To detect the phenotype of germinated C. 
difficile bacteria, we utilize its characteristically higher net conductivity 
versus that of spore aggregates and non-viable C. difficile forms, which causes 
a distinctive high-frequency (10 MHz) impedance phase dispersion within 
moderately conductive media (0.8 S/m). In this manner, we can detect significant 
differences in spore germination rates within just 4 h, with increasing primary 
bile salt levels in vitro and using ex vivo microbiota samples from an 
antibiotic-treated mouse model to assess susceptibility to C. difficile 
infection. We envision a rapid diagnostic tool for assessing host microbiota 
susceptibility to bacterial colonization after key antibiotic treatments.
