Clostridioides difficile infections (CDI) has emerged worldwide as a serious 
antimicrobial-resistant healthcare-associated disease resulting in diarrhea and 
pseudomembranous colitis. The two cytotoxic proteins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B 
(TcdB) are the major virulence factor responsible for the disease symptoms. We 
examined time-dependent oxidative detoxification of TcdA and TcdB using 
different molar ratios of protein:Cu2+:H2O2. The metal-catalyzed oxidation (MCO) 
reaction in molar ratios of 1:60:1000 for protein:Cu2+:H2O2 at pH 4.5 resulted 
in a significant 6 log10 fold reduction in cytotoxicity after 120-min incubation 
at 37 °C. Circular dichroism revealed that MCO-detoxified TcdA and TcdB had 
secondary and tertiary structural folds similar to the native proteins. The 
conservation of immunogenic epitopes of both proteins was tested using 
monoclonal antibodies in an ELISA, comparing our MCO-detoxification approach to 
a conventional formaldehyde-detoxification method. The oxidative detoxification 
of TcdA and TcdB led to an average 2-fold reduction in antibody binding relative 
to native proteins, whereas formaldehyde cross-linking resulted in 3-fold and 
5-fold reductions, respectively. Finally, we show that mice immunized with a 
vaccine consisting of MCO-detoxified TcdA and TcdB were fully protected against 
disease symptoms and death following a C. difficile infection and elicited 
substantial serum IgG responses against both TcdA and TcdB. The results of this 
study present copper ion-catalyzed oxidative detoxification of toxic proteins as 
a method highly suitable for the rapid production of safe, immunogenic and 
irreversible toxoid antigens for future vaccine development and may have the 
potential for replacing cross-linking reagents like formaldehyde.
