For prophylactic therapy, mice received an oral antibiotic cocktail followed by 
clindamycin injection, followed by probiotic administration (planktonic vs. 
biofilm state), followed by C. difficile oral gavage. For treatment therapy, 
mice received antibiotics and C. difficile first, followed by probiotic 
administration. Clinical sickness scores (CSS) and intestinal histologic injury 
scores (HIS) were assigned. In the Prophylactic Therapy model, CSS: 67% of 
untreated mice exposed to C. difficile demonstrated CSS ≥ 6, which is consistent 
with C. difficile infection (p< .001 compared to unexposed mice). In mice 
treated with planktonic Lr, 55% had a CSS ≥ 6, but only 19% of mice treated with 
Lr in its biofilm state had CSS ≥ 6 (p< .001). Mice receiving Lr + DM-Maltose 
lost the least amount of weight compared to mice receiving saline (p = .004676) 
or to mice receiving Lr (p= .003185). HIS: 77% of untreated mice exposed to C. 
difficile had HIS scores ≥4, which is consistent with C. difficile infection. In 
mice treated with planktonic Lr, 62% had HIS ≥4, but only 19% of mice treated 
with Lr in its biofilm state had HIS ≥4. (p< .001). Additionally, mice treated 
with Lr in its biofilm state had better survival compared to untreated mice and 
to mice treated with planktonic Lr (p ≤ 0.05). Similar findings for weight loss, 
CSS, HIS and survival were obtained for Treatment Therapy. A single dose of 
Lactobacillus reuteri in its biofilm state reduces the severity and incidence of 
experimental C. difficile infection when administered as both prophylactic and 
treatment therapy.
