Enzymatic inactivation of Rho-family GTPases by the glucosyltransferase domain 
of Clostridioides difficile Toxin B (TcdB) gives rise to various pathogenic 
effects in cells that are classically thought to be responsible for the disease 
symptoms associated with C. difficile infection (CDI). Recent in vitro studies 
have shown that TcdB can, under certain circumstances, induce cellular 
toxicities that are independent of glucosyltransferase (GT) activity, calling 
into question the precise role of GT activity. Here, to establish the importance 
of GT activity in CDI disease pathogenesis, we generated the first described 
mutant strain of C. difficile producing glucosyltransferase-defective 
(GT-defective) toxin. Using allelic exchange (AE) technology, we first deleted 
tcdA in C. difficile 630Δerm and subsequently introduced a deactivating D270N 
substitution in the GT domain of TcdB. To examine the role of GT activity in 
vivo, we tested each strain in two different animal models of CDI pathogenesis. 
In the non-lethal murine model of infection, the GT-defective mutant induced 
minimal pathology in host tissues as compared to the profound caecal 
inflammation seen in the wild-type and 630ΔermΔtcdA (ΔtcdA) strains. In the more 
sensitive hamster model of CDI, whereas hamsters in the wild-type or ΔtcdA 
groups succumbed to fulminant infection within 4 days, all hamsters infected 
with the GT-defective mutant survived the 10-day infection period without 
primary symptoms of CDI or evidence of caecal inflammation. These data 
demonstrate that GT activity is indispensable for disease pathogenesis and 
reaffirm its central role in disease and its importance as a therapeutic target 
for small-molecule inhibition.
