The microbiome plays a key role in homeostasis and health and it has been also 
linked to fertility and semen quality in several animal species including swine. 
Despite the more than likely importance of sperm bacteria on the boar's 
reproductive ability and the dissemination of pathogens and antimicrobial 
resistance genes, the high throughput characterization of the swine sperm 
microbiome remains scarce. We carried RNA-seq on 40 ejaculates each from a 
different Pietrain boar and found that a proportion of the sequencing reads did 
not map to the Sus scrofa genome. The current study aimed at using these reads 
not belonging to pig to carry a pilot study to profile the boar sperm bacterial 
population and its relation with 7 semen quality traits. We found that the boar 
sperm contains a broad population of bacteria. The most abundant phyla were 
Proteobacteria (39.1%), Firmicutes (27.5%), Actinobacteria (14.9%) and 
Bacteroidetes (5.7%). The predominant species contaminated sperm after 
ejaculation from soil, faeces and water sources (Bacillus megaterium, 
Brachybacterium faecium, Bacillus coagulans). Some potential pathogens were also 
found but at relatively low levels (Escherichia coli, Clostridioides difficile, 
Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium botulinum and Mycobacterium tuberculosis). 
We also identified 3 potential antibiotic resistant genes from E.Â coli against 
chloramphenicol, Neisseria meningitidis against spectinomycin and Staphylococcus 
aureus against linezolid. None of these genes were highly abundant. Finally, we 
classified the ejaculates into categories according to their bacterial features 
and semen quality parameters and identified two categories that significantly 
differed for 5 semen quality traits and 13 bacterial features including the 
genera Acinetobacter, Stenotrophomonas and Rhodobacter. Our results show that 
boar semen contains a bacterial community, including potential pathogens and 
putative antibiotic resistance genes, and that these bacteria may affect its 
reproductive performance.
