BACKGROUND: Based on MLST analyses the global population of C. difficile is 
distributed in eight clades, of which Clade 2 includes the "hypervirulent" 
NAP1/RT027/ST01 strain along with various unexplored sequence types (STs).
METHODS: To clarify whether this clinically relevant phenotype is a widespread 
feature of C. difficile Clade 2, we used the murine ileal loop model to compare 
the in vivo pro-inflammatory (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6) and oxidative stress 
activities (MPO) of five Clade 2 clinical C. difficile isolates from sequence 
types (STs) 01, 41, 67, and 252. Besides, we infected Golden Syrian hamsters 
with spores from these strains to determine their lethality, and obtain a 
histological evaluation of tissue damage, WBC counts, and serum injury 
biomarkers (LDH, ALT, AST, albumin, BUN, creatinine, Na+, and Cl-). Genomic 
distances were calculated using Mash and FastANI to explore whether the 
responses were dictated by phylogeny.
RESULTS: The ST01 isolate tested ranked first in all assays, as it induced the 
highest overall levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, MPO activity, epithelial 
damage, biochemical markers, and mortality measured in both animal models. 
Statistically indistinguishable or rather similar outputs were obtained for a 
ST67 isolate in tests such as tissue damage, neutrophils count, and lethal 
activity. The results recorded for the two ST41 isolates tested were of 
intermediate magnitude and the ST252 isolate displayed the lowest pathogenic 
potential in all animal experiments. This ordering matched the genomic distance 
of the ST01 isolate to the non-ST01 isolates.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite their close phylogenic relatedness, our results demonstrate 
differences in pathogenicity and virulence levels in Clade 2 C. difficile 
strains, confirm the high severity of infections caused by the NAP1/RT027/ST01 
strain, and highlight the importance of C. difficile typing.
