The relationship between the gut microbiota and Clostridioides difficile, and 
its role in the severity of C. difficile infection in humans is an area of 
active research. Intestinal carriage of toxigenic and non-toxigenic C. difficile 
strains, with and without clinical signs, is reported in animals, however few 
studies have looked at the risk factors associated with C. difficile carriage 
and the role of the host gut microbiota. Here, we isolated and characterized 
C. difficile strains from different animal species (predominantly canines 
(dogs), felines (cats), and equines (horses)) that were brought in for tertiary 
care at North Carolina State University Veterinary Hospital. C. difficile 
strains were characterized by toxin gene profiling, fluorescent PCR ribotyping, 
and antimicrobial susceptibility testing. 16S rRNA gene sequencing was done on 
animal feces to investigate the relationship between the presence of 
C. difficile and the gut microbiota in different hosts. Here, we show that 
C. difficile was recovered from 20.9% of samples (42/201), which included 33 
canines, 2 felines, and 7 equines. Over 69% (29/42) of the isolates were 
toxigenic and belonged to 14 different ribotypes including ones known to cause 
CDI in humans. The presence of C. difficile results in a shift in the fecal 
microbial community structure in both canines and equines. Commensal Clostridium 
hiranonis was negatively associated with C. difficile in canines. Further 
experimentation showed a clear antagonistic relationship between the two strains 
in vitro, suggesting that commensal Clostridia might play a role in colonization 
resistance against C. difficile in different hosts.
