Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is a toxin-mediated infection in the 
gut and a major burden on healthcare facilities worldwide. We rationalized that 
it would be beneficial to design an antibody therapy that is delivered to, and 
is active at the site of toxin production, rather than neutralizing the 
circulating and luminal toxins after significant damage of the layers of the 
intestines has occurred. Here we describe a highly potent therapeutic, OraCAb, 
with high antibody titers and a formulation that protects the antibodies from 
digestion/inactivation in the gastrointestinal tract. The potential of OraCAb to 
prevent CDI in an in vivo hamster model and an in vitro human colon model was 
assessed. In the hamster model we optimized the ratio of the antibodies against 
each of the toxins produced by C. difficile (Toxins A and B). The concentration 
of immunoglobulins that is effective in a hamster model of CDI was determined. A 
highly significant difference in animal survival for those given an optimized 
OraCAb formulation versus an untreated control group was observed. This is the 
first study testing the effect of oral antibodies for treatment of CDI in an in 
vitro gut model seeded with a human fecal inoculum. Treatment with OraCAb 
successfully neutralized toxin production and did not interfere with the colonic 
microbiota in this model. Also, treatment with a combination of vancomycin and 
OraCAb prevented simulated CDI recurrence, unlike vancomycin therapy alone. 
These data demonstrate the efficacy of OraCAb formulation for the treatment of 
CDI in pre-clinical models.

Copyright Â© 2020 Roberts, Harris, Smith, Giles, Polak, Buckley, Clark, Ewin, 
Moura, Spitall, Shone, Wilcox, Chilton and Donev.
