The gut microbiota has a key role in determining susceptibility to 
Clostridioides difficile infections (CDIs). However, much of the mechanistic 
work examining CDIs in mouse models uses animals obtained from a single source. 
We treated mice from 6 sources (2 University of Michigan colonies and 4 
commercial vendors) with clindamycin, followed by a C. difficile challenge, and 
then measured C. difficile colonization levels throughout the infection. The 
microbiota were profiled via 16S rRNA gene sequencing to examine the variation 
across sources and alterations due to clindamycin treatment and C. difficile 
challenge. While all mice were colonized 1 day postinfection, variation emerged 
from days 3 to 7 postinfection with animals from some sources colonized with C. 
difficile for longer and at higher levels. We identified bacteria that varied in 
relative abundance across sources and throughout the experiment. Some bacteria 
were consistently impacted by clindamycin treatment in all sources of mice, 
including Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae To identify 
bacteria that were most important to colonization regardless of the source, we 
created logistic regression models that successfully classified mice based on 
whether they cleared C. difficile by 7â€‰days postinfection using community 
composition data at baseline, post-clindamycin treatment, and 1 day 
postinfection. With these models, we identified 4 bacterial taxa that were 
predictive of whether C. difficile cleared. They varied across sources 
(Bacteroides) or were altered by clindamycin (Porphyromonadaceae) or both 
(Enterobacteriaceae and Enterococcus). Allowing for microbiota variation across 
sources better emulates human interindividual variation and can help identify 
bacterial drivers of phenotypic variation in the context of CDIs.IMPORTANCE 
Clostridioides difficile is a leading nosocomial infection. Although 
perturbation to the gut microbiota is an established risk, there is variation in 
who becomes asymptomatically colonized, develops an infection, or has adverse 
infection outcomes. Mouse models of C. difficile infection (CDI) are widely used 
to answer a variety of C. difficile pathogenesis questions. However, the 
interindividual variation between mice from the same breeding facility is less 
than what is observed in humans. Therefore, we challenged mice from 6 different 
breeding colonies with C. difficile We found that the starting microbial 
community structures and C. difficile persistence varied by the source of mice. 
Interestingly, a subset of the bacteria that varied across sources were 
associated with how long C. difficile was able to colonize. By increasing the 
interindividual diversity of the starting communities, we were able to better 
model human diversity. This provided a more nuanced perspective of C. difficile 
pathogenesis.
