OBJECTIVES: Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease with multifactorial 
etiopathogenesis. Among the environmental factors, mucosal infections and the 
inducing pathobionts are gaining increasing attention. We here set out to 
explore the gut-joint-axis and the impact of Clostridioides difficile infection 
on subsequent arthritis.
METHODS: We combined C. difficile infection in DBA/1J × B10.Q F1 mice with 
collagen induced arthritis (CIA). Mice were infected via oral gavage and 
infection was monitored by weight loss, colonic histology, and antibodies 
against bacteria. Scoring of arthritis was performed macroscopically. Intestinal 
microbiomes were analyzed and immune responses were monitored via quantification 
of transcription factor-specific mRNA isolated from the inguinal and mesenteric 
lymph nodes.
RESULTS: Infection with C. difficile VPI 10463 resulted in significant weight 
loss and severe colitis yet accelerated the reversal towards the original 
microbiome after antibiotic treatment. Spontaneous clearance of VPI 10463 
infection reduced the incidence of subsequent CIA and led to mesenteric Treg and 
Th2 polarization. However, this attenuating effect was abrogated if VPI 10463 
was eradicated via vancomycin followed by fecal microbiota transplantation. 
Moreover, VPI 10463 infection following the onset of CIA lacked therapeutic 
potential.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that infection with C. difficile VPI10463 
induced an inflammation of the gut that protected from subsequent arthritis 
development in mice. Both, microbial changes to the gut and immune cell 
mobilization and/or polarization may have contributed to arthritis protection. 
The prospect of potential therapeutic benefits resulting from C. difficile 
infections or some byproduct thereof call for further experiments that help 
elucidate exact mechanisms.

Copyright © 2020 Schmidt, Wenndorf, Ebbers, Volzke, Müller, Strübing, Kriebel, 
Kneitz, Kreikemeyer and Müller-Hilke.
