Clostridioides difficile is an enteric bacterial pathogen that can a cause 
nosocomial infection leading to debilitating colitis. The development of a 
murine model of C. difficile infection has led to fundamental discoveries in 
disease pathogenesis and the host immune response to infection. Recently, C. 
difficile endogenously present in the microbiota of mice has been reported and 
was found to complicate interpretation of mouse studies. Here, we report a novel 
C. difficile strain, named NTCD-035, isolated from the microbiota of our mouse 
colony. The presence of NTCD-035 in mice prior to challenge with a highly 
pathogenic C. difficile strain (VPI10463) led to significantly reduced disease 
severity. Phylogenetic characterization derived from whole genome sequencing and 
PCR ribotyping identified the isolate as a novel clade 1, ribotype 035 strain 
that lacks the pathogenicity locus required to produce toxins. Deficiency in 
toxin production along with sporulation capacity and secondary bile acid 
sensitivity was confirmed using in vitro assays. Inoculation of germ-free mice 
with NTCD-035 did not cause morbidity despite the strain readily colonizing the 
large intestine. Implementation of a culture-based screening procedure enabled 
the identification of mice harboring C. difficile in their microbiota, the 
establishment of a C. difficile-free mouse colony, and a monitoring system to 
prevent future contamination. Taken together, these data provide a framework for 
screening mice for endogenously harbored C. difficile and support clinical 
findings that demonstrate the therapeutic potential of non-toxigenic strains in 
preventing C. difficile associated disease. Abbreviations: PaLoc - Pathogenicity 
locus, CFUs - Colony forming units, TcdA - toxin-A, TcdB - toxin-B, CdtA - 
binary toxin A, CdtB - binary toxin B, CdtR - binary toxin R, NTCD - 
non-toxigenic C. difficile.
