There is an increasing concern about the role of animals as reservoirs of 
Clostridioides difficile. In this study, we investigated prevalence, 
antimicrobial resistance and zoonotic potential of C. difficile in dogs. 
Two-hundred and twenty-five dog faecal deposits were collected from trashcans in 
nine public gardens. C. difficile was isolated using selective plating and 
enrichment culture, identified by MALDI-TOF, tested for susceptibility to seven 
antibiotics by E-test, and sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq platform. Genome 
sequences were analysed to determine multilocus sequence types and resistance 
and toxin gene profiles. Zoonotic potential was assessed by measuring genetic 
variations of core genome (cg)MLST types between canine isolates and 216 
temporally and spatially related human clinical isolates from a national 
database. C. difficile was isolated from 11 samples (4.9%). Seven isolates were 
toxigenic (tcdA+, tcdB+, cdtA/B-) and belonged to the sequence types ST2, ST6, 
ST10 and ST42. The four non-toxigenic isolates were assigned to ST15, ST26 and 
one novel ST. ST2, corresponding to PCR ribotype RT014/020, was the dominating 
lineage (n = 4) and, together with ST26 and ST42 isolates, showed close 
resemblance to human isolates, i.e. 2-5 allelic differences among the 1999 genes 
analysed by cgMLST. Three non-toxigenic isolates displayed resistance to 
clindamycin, erythromycin and tetracycline mediated by erm(B) and tet(M). 
Resistance to metronidazole, moxifloxacine, rifampicin or vancomycin was not 
detected. In conclusion, a small proportion of faecal deposits contained 
toxigenic C. difficile such as ST2 (RT014/020), which is a major cause of 
community-acquired infections. Our finding suggests that pathogenic strains can 
be exchanged between dogs and humans.
