Clostridioides difficile is linked to nearly 225,000 antibiotic-associated 
diarrheal infections and almost 13,000 deaths per year in the United States. 
Pathogenic strains of C. difficile produce toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), 
which can directly kill cells and induce an inflammatory response in the colonic 
mucosa. Hirota et al. (S. A. Hirota et al., Infect Immun 80:4474-4484, 2012) 
first introduced the intrarectal instillation model of intoxication using TcdA 
and TcdB purified from VPI 10463 (VPI 10463 reference strain [ATCC 43255]) and 
630 C. difficile strains. Here, we expand this technique by instilling purified, 
recombinant TcdA and TcdB, which allows for the interrogation of how 
specifically mutated toxins affect tissue. Mouse colons were processed and 
stained with hematoxylin and eosin for blinded evaluation and scoring by a 
board-certified gastrointestinal pathologist. The amount of TcdA or TcdB needed 
to produce damage was lower than previously reported in vivo and ex vivo 
Furthermore, TcdB mutants lacking either endosomal pore formation or 
glucosyltransferase activity resemble sham negative controls. Immunofluorescent 
staining revealed how TcdB initially damages colonic tissue by altering the 
epithelial architecture closest to the lumen. Tissue sections were also 
immunostained for markers of acute inflammatory infiltration. These staining 
patterns were compared to slides from a human C. difficile infection (CDI). The 
intrarectal instillation mouse model with purified recombinant TcdA and/or TcdB 
provides the flexibility needed to better understand structure/function 
relationships across different stages of CDI pathogenesis.
