For many organisms, mucosal association is an important virulence determinant. 
Although studied in detail for other intestinal pathogens, this aspect of 
pathogenicity has not been studied for Clostridium difficile. We compared the 
ability of an avirulent non-toxigenic strain (M-1), a highly virulent toxigenic 
strain (B-1), and a poorly virulent toxigenic strain (BAT) of C. difficile to 
adhere to different regions of the gastrointestinal tract of hamsters 
pre-treated with clindamycin. Strain B-1 associated with the gut mucosa 
significantly better than strain M-1 (p less than 0.001) for all sites other 
than the caecum, and achieved significantly higher levels in the caecal contents 
(p less than 0.001). The same was true when strain B-1 was compared with strain 
BAT except that there was no significant difference for the large bowel mucosa. 
To assess the possible role of toxin in promoting mucosal association, e.g., by 
compromising host defences or exposing masked adherence sites, strain M-1 was 
given to animals after intra-caecal administration of crude toxin preparations 
from strain-B1, which were heat-inactivated in control experiments. The addition 
of this toxin increased significantly the mucosal association of M-1 for the 
small bowel only, whereas the inactivated toxin had no significant effect. These 
results imply that there may be intrinsic differences between strains in their 
ability to colonise and associate with the gut mucosa, which may partly depend 
on their ability to produce toxin. These differences do not correlate with 
cell-surface hydrophobicity or the presence of plasmids, flagella or fimbriae.
