OPS-2071 is a novel quinolone antibacterial agent characterized by low oral 
absorption that reduces the risk of adverse events typical of fluoroquinolone 
class antibiotics. The in vitro and in vivo antibacterial activities of OPS-2071 
against Clostridioides difficile were evaluated in comparison to vancomycin and 
fidaxomicin. OPS-2071 exhibited potent antibacterial activity against 54 
clinically isolated C. difficile strains with a MIC of 0.125 μg/ml (MIC50) and 
0.5 μg/ml (MIC90), making it more active than vancomycin on a concentration 
basis (MIC50, 2 μg/ml; MIC90, 4 μg/ml) and comparable to fidaxomicin (MIC50, 
0.063 μg/ml; MIC90, 8 μg/ml). OPS-2071 showed equally potent antibacterial 
activity against both hypervirulent and nonhypervirulent strains, while a 
significant difference in susceptibility to fidaxomicin was observed. 
Spontaneous resistance to OPS-2071 and vancomycin was not observed; however, 
resistance to fidaxomicin was observed at 4× MIC. The mutant prevention 
concentration of OPS-2071 was 16-fold lower than those of fidaxomicin and 
vancomycin, and the postantibiotic effect of OPS-2071 was longer than those of 
fidaxomicin and vancomycin. Also, OPS-2071 showed low systemic exposure, with 
OPS-2071 having 2.9% oral bioavailability at 1 mg/kg in rats. Furthermore, 
OPS-2071 showed significant in vivo efficacy at 0.0313 mg/kg/day (50% effective 
doses), 39.0-fold and 52.1-fold lower than those of vancomycin and fidaxomicin, 
respectively, in a hamster model of C. difficile infection. OPS-2071 has the 
potential to become a new therapeutic option for treating C. difficile 
infection.
