Urban Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) carry several pathogens transmissible to 
people. However, pathogen prevalence can vary across fine spatial scales (i.e., 
by city block). Using a population genomics approach, we sought to describe rat 
movement patterns across an urban landscape and to evaluate whether these 
patterns align with pathogen distributions. We genotyped 605 rats from a single 
neighborhood in Vancouver, Canada, and used 1,495 genome-wide single nucleotide 
polymorphisms to identify parent-offspring and sibling relationships using 
pedigree analysis. We resolved 1,246 pairs of relatives, of which only 1% of 
pairs were captured in different city blocks. Relatives were primarily caught 
within 33 meters of each other leading to a highly leptokurtic distribution of 
dispersal distances. Using binomial generalized linear mixed models, we 
evaluated whether family relationships influenced rat pathogen status with the 
bacterial pathogens Leptospira interrogans, Bartonella tribocorum, and 
Clostridium difficile, and found that an individual's pathogen status was not 
predicted any better by including disease status of related rats. The spatial 
clustering of related rats and their pathogens lends support to the hypothesis 
that spatially restricted movement promotes the heterogeneous patterns of 
pathogen prevalence evidenced in this population. Our findings also highlight 
the utility of evolutionary tools to understand movement and rat-associated 
health risks in urban landscapes.

Â© 2020 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.
