OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy of a novel lantibiotic, CMB001, against 
MRSA biofilms in vitro and in an in vivo experimental model of bacterial 
infection.
METHODS: Antibacterial activity of CMB001 was measured in vitro after its 
exposure to whole blood or to platelet-poor plasma. In vitro efficacy of CMB001 
against a Staphylococcus aureus biofilm was studied using scanning electron 
microscopy. The maximum tolerable dose in mice was determined and a preliminary 
pharmacokinetic analysis for CMB001 was performed in mice. In vivo efficacy was 
evaluated in a neutropenic mouse thigh model of infection.
RESULTS: CMB001 maintained its antibacterial activity in the presence of blood 
or plasma for up to 24 h at 37°C. CMB001 efficiently killed S. aureus within the 
biofilm by causing significant damage to the bacterial cell wall. The maximum 
tolerable dose in mice was established to be 10 mg/kg and could be increased to 
30 mg/kg in mice pretreated with antihistamines. In neutropenic mice infected 
with MRSA, treatment with CMB001 reduced the bacterial burden with an efficacy 
equivalent to that of vancomycin.
CONCLUSIONS: CMB001 offers potential as an alternative treatment option to 
combat MRSA. It will be of interest to evaluate the in vivo efficacy of CMB001 
against infections caused by other pathogens, including Clostridioides difficile 
and Acinetobacter baumannii, and to expand its pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic 
parameters and safety profile.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
