Infection with the bacterial pathogen Clostridioides difficile causes severe 
damage to the intestinal epithelium that elicits a robust inflammatory response. 
Markers of intestinal inflammation accurately predict clinical disease severity. 
However, determining the extent to which host-derived proinflammatory mediators 
drive pathogenesis versus promote host protective mechanisms remains elusive. In 
this report, we employed Il10 -/- mice as a model of spontaneous colitis to 
examine the impact of constitutive intestinal immune activation, independent of 
infection, on C. difficile disease pathogenesis. Upon C. difficile challenge, 
Il10 -/- mice exhibited significantly decreased morbidity and mortality compared 
to littermate Il10 heterozygote (Il10 HET) control mice, despite a comparable C. 
difficile burden, innate immune response, and microbiota composition following 
infection. Similarly, antibody-mediated blockade of IL-10 signaling in wild-type 
C57BL/6 mice conveyed a survival advantage if initiated three weeks prior to 
infection. In contrast, no advantage was observed if blockade was initiated on 
the day of infection, suggesting that constitutive activation of inflammatory 
defense pathways prior to infection mediated host protection. IL-22, a cytokine 
critical in mounting a protective response against C. difficile infection, was 
elevated in the intestine of uninfected, antibiotic-treated Il10 -/- mice, and 
genetic ablation of the IL-22 signaling pathway in Il10 -/- mice negated the 
survival advantage following C. difficile challenge. Collectively, these data 
demonstrate that constitutive loss of IL-10 signaling, via genetic ablation or 
antibody blockade, enhances IL-22 dependent host defense mechanisms to limit C. 
difficile pathogenesis.
