Gastrointestinal infections caused by Clostridium difficile lead to significant 
impact in terms of morbidity and mortality, causing from mild symptoms, such as 
a low-grade fever, watery stools, and minor abdominal cramping as well as more 
severe symptoms such as bloody diarrhea, pseudomembrane colitis, and toxic 
megacolon. Vaccination is a viable approach to fight against C. difficile and 
several efforts in this direction are ongoing. Plants are promising vaccine 
biofactories offering low cost, enhanced safety, and allow for the formulation 
of oral vaccines. Herein, the CdeM protein, which is a spore antigen associated 
with immunoprotection against C. difficile, was selected to begin the 
development of plant-based vaccine candidates. The vaccine antigen is based in a 
fusion protein (LTB-CdeM), carrying the CdeM antigen, fused to the 
carboxi-terminus of the B subunit of the Escherichia coli heat-labile 
enterotoxin (LTB) as a mucosal immunogenic carrier. LTB-CdeM was produced in 
plants using a synthetic optimized gene according codon usage and mRNA stability 
criteria. The obtained transformed tobacco lines produced the LTB-CdeM antigen 
in the range of 52-90 μg/g dry weight leaf tissues. The antigenicity of the 
plant-made LTB-CdeM antigen was evidenced by GM1-ELISA and immunogenicity 
assessment performed in test mice revealed that the LTB-CdeM antigen is orally 
immunogenic inducing humoral responses against CdeM epitopes. This report 
constitutes the first step in the development of plant-based vaccines against C. 
difficile infection.
