Colonization resistance (CR), the ability to block infections by potentially 
harmful microbes, is a fundamental function of host-associated microbial 
communities and highly conserved between animals and humans. Environmental 
factors such as antibiotics and diet can disturb microbial community composition 
and thereby predispose to opportunistic infections. The most prominent is 
Clostridioides difficile, the causative agent of diarrhea and pseudomembranous 
colitis. In addition, the risk to succumb to infections with genuine human 
enteric pathogens like nontyphoidal Salmonella (NTS) is also increased by a 
low-diverse, diet or antibiotic-disrupted microbiota. Despite extensive 
microbial community profiling efforts, only a limited set of microorganisms have 
been causally linked with protection against enteric pathogens. Furthermore, it 
remains a challenge to predict colonization resistance from complex microbiome 
signatures due to context-dependent action of microorganisms. In the past 
decade, the study of NTS infection has led to the description of several 
fundamental principles of microbiota-host-pathogen interaction. In this review, 
I will give an overview on the current state of knowledge in this field and 
outline experimental approaches to gain functional insight to the role of 
specific microbes, functions and metabolites in Salmonella-microbiota-host 
interaction. In particular, I will highlight the value of mouse infection 
models, which, in combination with culture collections, synthetic communities 
and gnotobiotic models have become essential tools to screen for protective 
members of the microbiota and establishing causal relationship and mechanisms in 
infection research.
