Interactions of commensal bacteria within the gut microbiota and with invading 
pathogens are critical in determining the outcome of an infection. While murine 
studies have been valuable, we lack in vitro models to monitor community 
responses to pathogens at a single-species level. We have developed a 
multispecies community of nine representative gut species cultured together as a 
mixed biofilm and tracked numbers of individual species over time using a 
quantitative PCR (qPCR)-based approach. Introduction of the major nosocomial gut 
pathogen, Clostridioides difficile, to this community resulted in increased 
adhesion of commensals and inhibition of C. difficile multiplication. 
Interestingly, we observed an increase in individual Bacteroides species 
accompanying the inhibition of C. difficile Furthermore, Bacteroides dorei 
reduced C. difficile growth within biofilms, suggesting a role for Bacteroides 
spp. in prevention of C. difficile colonization. We report here an in vitro tool 
with excellent applications for investigating bacterial interactions within a 
complex community.IMPORTANCE Studying interactions between bacterial species 
that reside in the human gut is crucial for gaining a better insight into how 
they provide protection from pathogen colonization. In vitro models of 
multispecies bacterial communities wherein behaviors of single species can be 
accurately tracked are key to such studies. Here, we have developed a synthetic, 
trackable, gut microbiota community which reduces growth of the human gut 
pathogen Clostridioides difficile We report that Bacteroides spp. within this 
community respond by multiplying in the presence of this pathogen, resulting in 
reduction of C. difficile growth. Defined in vitro communities that can be 
tailored to include different species are well suited to functional genomic 
approaches and are valuable tools for understanding interbacterial interactions.
