Each of nine different toxigenic strains of Clostridium difficile was 
administered orally to groups of hamsters pre-treated with clindamycin and 
housed individually in sterile isolator boxes. Faecal pellets and caecal 
contents from well, diarrhoeic, moribund and freshly dead animals were analysed 
for C. difficile and toxins A (enterotoxin) and B (cytotoxin), and tissue 
obtained when animals were killed was examined histologically. Not all strains 
were equally virulent in this model. Four strains of C. difficile killed all 
animals within 48 h and are designated as highly virulent for hamsters. These 
strains were clinical isolates from three cases of disease in man and one case 
in a hamster. Five strains caused death of some animals but only after 5 and upt 
to 13 days and are designated as less virulent for hamsters. These strains were 
isolated from asymptomatic infants (2) and household pets (2), and from the 
environment (1). The surviving test hamsters were killed after 14 days and, in 
most cases, were colonised by C. difficile, though levels of toxins A and B in 
caecal contents were low. None of the cultures used for challenge was capsulate 
or hydrophobic. There was no correlation between virulence and production of 
toxins A and B in vitro in tryptic-nitrate broth. With two strains examined, 
there was a correlation between virulence and toxin A (but not toxin B) 
production in caecal emulsions derived from clindamycin pre-treated hamsters. 
Caecal contents from the majority of moribund and freshly dead animals had 
quantities of toxin A sufficient to cause disease or death if given 
orogastrically. Toxin B was not produced in a fixed ratio with toxin A. The data 
support the view that high virulence of C. difficile is determined by efficient 
disease-inducing colonisation of the gut and the ability to generate, rapidly, 
high levels of toxin A in vivo.
