Sodium ampicillin was administered subcutaneously to 350-550 g male Dunkin 
Hartley guinea pigs at doses of 6, 8 and 10 mg/kg tid for 5 days. Over a period 
of 12 days, the lowest ampicillin dose appeared to be tolerated well. However, 
significant body weight reduction and mortality occurred with the two higher 
dosage regimens. Cecal cultures of dead animals confirmed the presence of 
Clostridium difficile, an organism associated with antibiotic-induced 
enterotoxemia. Assay of serum collected from ampicillin-treated animals revealed 
ampicillin concentrations of approximately 10 micrograms/ml at 5 minutes 
post-dosing which fell precipitously to less than 0.2 micrograms/ml at 60 
minutes. Determination of biliary ampicillin levels during the 60 minutes after 
administration of a single 10 mg/kg SQ dose revealed concentrations ranging from 
18 micrograms/ml to 90 micrograms/ml. Estimates of total urinary ampicillin 
content after a single 10 mg/kg SQ dose were less than 500 micrograms/animal at 
7.5 minutes, but increased to greater than 2000 micrograms/animal at 60 minutes 
after dosing. Results of this study indicated that due to its short serum 
half-life, sodium ampicillin probably has little systemic therapeutic efficacy 
in guinea pigs. Because high concentrations of ampicillin accumulated in the 
urine and bile, the antibiotic probably would have therapeutic efficacy for 
urinary and intestinal infections. However, its associated toxicity at large 
doses probably precludes its use. In view of the rapid clearance of ampicillin 
in guinea pigs in comparison to other species, the pharmacokinetics of other 
antibiotics, especially those reported to be less toxic for guinea pigs, should 
be considered.
