The pathophysiology of Clostridium difficile colitis is thought to be mediated 
by release of toxin A, an enterotoxin, and toxin B, a cytotoxin. We compared the 
differential effects of toxin B on protein synthesis in IMR-90 fibroblasts and 
in hamster esophagus, stomach, gallbladder, small intestine, and cecum in organ 
culture. Toxin B in low concentrations stimulated (p less than 0.001) 
incorporation of [3H]leucine into fibroblast proteins, whereas at higher dosages 
it inhibited incorporation (p less than 0.001). This biphasic effect was 
independent of cell rounding and was not caused by a change in uptake of 
precursor. Purified toxin B had no effect on protein synthesis in a cell-free 
rabbit reticulocyte translation system, indicating that inhibition of protein 
synthesis in intact fibroblast monolayers and intestinal explants is a 
consequence of toxin B effect on some other cellular target. Toxin B 
significantly inhibited protein synthesis in hamster cecal explants in a 
dose-dependent fashion. Again, this inhibition was not mediated by altered 
precursor uptake. Toxin B significantly inhibited in vitro protein synthesis in 
hamster terminal ileum, cecum, and sigmoid colon, but not in esophagus, 
gallbladder, stomach, or duodenum. These results suggest that toxin B-mediated 
inhibition of protein synthesis may be a generalized toxic effect in tissue 
culture cells and intestinal epithelium. Inhibition of protein synthesis in the 
distal intestinal epithelium may contribute to the pathophysiology of colitis 
caused by this organism.
