Outbred, inbred, and congenic strains of conventional mice which were 
ano-rectally occluded with cyanoacrylate ester glue and converted to sealed 
adult mice (SAM) were given, per os, crude cholera enterotoxin (CT) in 10% 
NaHCO3. At 6 h when the response was maximal, mice were killed, the small 
intestines were removed, and gut weight/body weight ratios were calculated. 
Experimental mice gave a linear response after receiving 1.5 to 60 micrograms of 
CT. Purified heat-stable enterotoxin from Escherichia coli and purified 
heat-labile enterotoxins from E. coli, Vibrio cholerae, and Clostridium 
difficile all elicited vigorous fluid outpouring as did culture filtrates from 
Vibrio fluvialis with cytotoxic activity. Active and passive immunization with 
crude CT completely or partially neutralized fluid secretion due to CT. 
Monospecific anti-CT incubated with CT before feeding also eliminated the 
response. Mice pretreated with penicillin, held in barrier cages, converted to 
SAM, and fed live vibrios, showed fluid responses similar to those seen with low 
doses of CT. Each of six different strains of inbred mice fed a half-maximal 
fluid accumulation response dose of CT gave fluid accumulation ratios which 
varied fourfold. There was no correlation of fluid accumulation with body 
weight, gut length, age, or sex. All poor responders were of H-2k haplotype and 
all good responders were H-2b. BALB congenic mice which differed only in H-2 
haplotypes showed the same correlations, and body weights and gut lengths of all 
haplotypes were not significantly different.
