The enterotoxin from Clostridium difficile (ToxA) is one of the causative agents 
of the antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis. In cultured monolayer 
cells ToxA exhibits cytotoxic activity to induce disassembly of the actin 
cytoskeleton, which is accompanied by morphological changes. ToxA-induced 
depolymerization of actin filaments is correlated with a decrease in the 
ADP-ribosylation of the low molecular mass GTP-binding Rho proteins (Just, I., 
Selzer, J., von Eichel-Streiber, C., and Aktories, K. (1995) J. Clin. Invest. 
95, 1026-1031). Here we report on the identification of the ToxA-induced 
modification of Rho. Applying electrospray mass spectrometry, the mass of the 
modification was determined as 162 Da, which is consistent with the 
incorporation of a hexose into Rho. From several hexoses tested UDP-glucose 
selectively served as cosubstrate for ToxA-catalyzed modification. The acceptor 
amino acid of glucosylation was identified from a Lys-C-generated peptide by 
tandem mass spectrometry as Thr-37. Mutation of Thr-37 to Ala completely 
abolished glucosylation. The members of the Rho family (RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42Hs) 
were substrates for ToxA, whereas H-Ras, Rab5, and Arf1 were not glucosylated. 
ToxA-catalyzed glucosylation of lysates from ToxA-pretreated rat basophilic 
leukemia (RBL) cells resulted in a decreased incorporation of [14C]glucose, 
indicating previous glucosylation in the intact cell. Glucosylation of the Rho 
subtype proteins appears to be the molecular mechanism by which C. difficile 
ToxA mediates its cytotoxic effects on cells.
