Biapenem (L-627), a novel injectable carbapenem antibiotic, was studied with 
regard to its effect on mice inoculated with four types of bacteria and on the 
intestinal flora of pediatric patients. L-627 was given i.m., 40 mg/kg once 
daily for 5 consecutive days, to mice inoculated enterically with four types of 
bacteria (Escherichia coli, Enterococcus faecalis, Bacteroides fragilis, and 
Bifidobacterium breve). Except for a mild decrease in E. coli, there were no 
major fluctuations in viable bacterial counts in the feces during the treatment. 
Five children with bacterial infections (3 boys and 2 girls; ages: 1 month to 7 
years and 7 months; body weights 4.62-21.8 kg) were given L-627 at 6.0 to 11.7 
mg/kg 3 times daily for 7 to 11 days. Among aerobes, although Enterobacteriaceae 
such as E. coli tended to decrease remarkably in all patients, there was no 
major change in Enterococcus. Consequently, total aerobe counts did not change 
significantly in any patient. Among anaerobes, Bifidobacterium, Bacteroides, and 
Eubacterium, which are the predominant organisms in infants, decreased 
remarkably in some patients. One of the patients showed a marked decrease in 
total anaerobe count associated with a change in fecal characteristics 
(diarrhea). Glucose nonfermenting Gram-negative bacilli or fungi did not become 
predominant organisms in any patient. Recovery from these changes in the 
intestinal flora was noted promptly after terminating L-627 treatment. L-627 was 
detected in the feces of 4 patients during treatment. The fecal concentration 
ranged from 0.24 to 2.22 micrograms/g. Clostridium difficile was not detected in 
any patient. Although C. difficile D-1 antigen was observed in 2 patients, it 
bore no relationship to fecal properties. The results indicated that L-627 had 
relatively few effects on the intestinal flora compared to other new beta-lactam 
antibiotics.
