Our laboratory has previously shown that Clostridium difficile adherence to 
Caco-2 cells is greatly enhanced after heat shock at 60 degrees C and that it is 
mediated by a proteinaceous surface component. The experiments described here 
show that C. difficile could adhere to several types of tissue culture cells 
(Vero, HeLa, and KB) after heat shock. The type of culture medium (liquid or 
solid, with or without blood) had little effect on adhesion. To clone the 
adhesin gene, polyclonal antibodies against C. difficile heated at 60 degrees C 
were used to screen a genomic library of C. difficile constructed in lambda 
ZapII. Ten positive clones were identified in the library, one of which (pCL6) 
agglutinated several types of erythrocytes in the presence of mannose. In 
Western blots (immunoblots), this clone expressed in Escherichia coli a 40- and 
a 27-kDa protein; a 27-kDa protein has been previously identified in the surface 
extracts of heat-shocked C. difficile as a possible adhesin. The clone adhered 
to Vero, Caco-2, KB, and HeLa cells; the adherence was blocked by anti-C. 
difficile antibodies, by a surface extract of C. difficile, and by mucus 
isolated from axenic mice. Furthermore, the clone could attach ex vivo to 
intestinal mucus isolated from axenic mice. Preliminary studies on the receptor 
moieties implicated in C. difficile adhesion revealed that glucose and galactose 
could partially block adhesion to tissue culture cells, as did di- or 
trisaccharides containing these sugars, suggesting that the adhesin is a lectin. 
In addition, N-acetylgalactosamine, a component of mucus, and gelatin partially 
impeded cell attachment.
