Toxin A peptide from Clostridium difficile caused damage and secretion in the 
intestinal mucosa. These effects are mediated in part by pro-inflammatory 
substances. In order to evaluate and compare the biologic effect of toxin A on 
renal vascular, glomerular and tubular functions, we studied this toxin in 
isolated rat kidneys. Isolated kidneys from adult male Wistar rats (260-320 g) 
were perfused with Krebs-Henseleit solution containing 60 mg/ml dialyzed bovine 
serum albumin. We studied the effect of toxin A peptide (3.2 x 10(-6) M, 
injected into perfusate) on glomerular filtration rate (GFR), urinary flow rate 
(UF) and total sodium reabsorption (TNa+, %). All experiments were preceded by a 
30-min basal period, and in another group of kidneys the time course of the 
variables was followed without toxin infusion for unpaired control. Toxin A 
(TxA) reduced the perfusion pressure (PP), from PPcontrol/30min = 124.89 +/- 
1.91 to PPTxA/120min = 88.13 +/- 5.1 mmHg (N = 6, P < 0.01) with a maximal 
effect at 120 min after toxin infusion. TxA also caused a significant decrease 
in GFR with maximal effect at 90 min after toxin infusion (GFRcontrol/30min = 
0.53 +/- 0.05 to GFRTxA/90min = 0.30 + 0.05 ml min-1g-1; N = 6, P < 0.01). TxA 
did not alter renal tubular sodium transport when compared with a control 
without toxin infusion. In addition, toxin-treated kidneys caused a 
time-dependent increase in urinary flow from UFcontrol/30min = 0.16 +/- 0.08 to 
UFTxA/120min = 0.35 +/- 0.1 ml min-1g-1 (N = 6, P < 0.05).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)
