Faecal samples from 123 infants who died with sudden infant death syndrome 
(SIDS) and from a comparative group of 52 age-matched babies were analysed for 
toxigenic bacteria and their toxins. Serum samples from the SIDS infants were 
also analysed for these toxins. A significantly higher proportion of toxigenic 
bacteria and their toxins were found in faecal samples of SIDS babies than in 
samples from the comparative group. These toxins were also found in serum from 
the SIDS babies. Clostridium perfringens was found in 54 (45.4%) of 119 SIDS 
cases compared with 10 (19.6%) of 51 healthy babies (chi 2 = 10.1, p < 0.01); C. 
difficile in 33 (27.7%) of 119 SIDS cases compared with 8 (14.8%) of 54 healthy 
babies (chi 2 = 3.43ns, p < 0.1); Staphylococcus aureus in 12 (27.3%; 66.7% 
enterotoxigenic) of 44 SIDS cases compared with 12 (85.7%; non-enterotoxigenic) 
of 14 healthy babies (chi 2 = 14.9, p < 0.001); C. botulinum in 6 (5.0%) of 120 
SIDS cases compared with 0 of 53 healthy babies (chi 2 = 2.74, p < 0.1). 
Campylobacter jejuni, Yersinia enterocolitica, Vibrio parahaemolyticus, 
salmonellae and Bacillus cereus were not detected. Heat-labile toxin, lethal to 
mice (HLML) was found in 32 (27.1%) of 118 SIDS faecal samples compared with 5 
(10.6%) of 47 healthy babies (chi 2 = 5.24, p < 0.05); cytotoxins in 38 (30.9%) 
of 123 SIDS faecal samples compared with 0 of 21 of healthy babies (chi 2 = 8.8, 
p < 0.01) and 24 (27.6%) of 87 SIDS serum samples. C. perfringens enterotoxin 
was detected in 33 (34.4%) of 96 SIDS faecal extracts compared with 0 of 23 of 
healthy babies (chi 2 = 10.94, p < 0.001), and in 27 (24.5%) of 110 SIDS serum 
samples. C. perfringens alpha-toxin (presumptive) was detected in 14 (17.5%) of 
80 SIDS faecal extracts compared with 0 of 17 from healthy babies (chi 2 = 
3.5ns, p congruent to 0.05) and in 2 (2.3%) of 87 SIDS serum samples. C. 
difficile toxin was detected in four SIDS faecal samples and two serum samples. 
C. botulinum toxin was detected in only one of 120 SIDS faecal samples compared 
with none of 49 from healthy babies. Staphylococcal enterotoxins were detected 
in 8 (19.5%) of 41 SIDS faecal samples compared with 0 of 19 from healthy babies 
(chi 2 = 4.278, p < 0.05), and in 4 (10.8%) of 37 SIDS serum samples.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)
