Clostridium difficile toxins A and B cause antibiotic-associated colitis. 
Whereas antigenic determinants specifying neutralisation of toxin A have been 
partially elucidated, those of toxin B remain unknown. To define antigenic 
determinants of toxin B, synthetic peptides were prepared for five linear 
sequences selected by computer analysis for putative T and B epitopes. Peptides 
spanning the carboxy terminal region (aa 2155-2283) were also selected because 
this region contains repetitive units thought to bind the toxin to cell 
receptors. Multiple antigenic peptides were synthesised by linking four peptide 
copies to a core of four lysine residues (tetraMAP). Outbred mice were given 
four doses of each tetraMAP by intraperitoneal injection and specific 
immunoglobulins G and A were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) in serum, ascitic fluid and faeces. All 14 MAPs induced strong IgG 
responses against the homologous peptide; peptides representing aa 2155-2179 and 
2246-2270 induced the strongest responses, of 592 and 493 ELISA units, 
respectively - although, to a lower extent, all 14 MAPs induced serum and faecal 
IgA responses against the homologous peptide. All MAPs induced IgG1 and IgG2b 
subclasses, documenting their capacity to elicit Th2-dependent mucosal immunity. 
IgG anti-MAPs were assayed for reaction with native toxins A and B; most 
anti-MAPs recognised the toxins only weakly or did not recognise them. 
Antibodies against peptide representing aa 2168-2192 recognised both native 
toxin B (19 ELISA units) and toxin A (2 ELISA units). None of the antibodies 
neutralised cytotoxicity of either toxin in cell culture. In contrast, four MAPs 
(aa 2080-2095, 2168-2192, 2220-2244 and 2233-2257) inhibited cytotoxicity when 
mixed with toxin B before addition to cells; inhibition was mediated by a direct 
interaction with toxin B.
