Saccharomyces boulardii, a nonpathogenic yeast, is effective in treating some 
patients with Clostridium difficile diarrhea and colitis. We have previously 
reported that S. boulardii inhibits rat ileal secretion in response to C. 
difficile toxin A possibly by releasing a protease that digests the intestinal 
receptor for this toxin (C. Pothoulakis, C. P. Kelly, M. A. Joshi, N. Gao, C. J. 
O'Keane, I. Castagliuolo, and J. T. LaMont, Gastroenterology 104: 1108-1115, 
1993). The aim of this study was to purify and characterize this protease. S. 
boulardii protease was partially purified by gel filtration on Sephadex G-50 and 
octyl-Sepharose. The effect of S. boulardii protease on rat ileal secretion, 
epithelial permeability, and morphology in response to toxin A was examined in 
rat ileal loops in vivo. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis of the purified S. boulardii protease revealed a major band at 
54 kDa. Pretreatment of rat ileal brush border (BB) membranes with partially 
purified protease reduced specific toxin A receptor binding (by 26%). Partially 
purified protease digested the toxin A molecule and significantly reduced its 
binding to BB membranes in vitro (by 42%). Preincubation of toxin A with S. 
boulardii protease inhibited ileal secretion (46% inhibition, P < 0.01), 
mannitol permeability (74% inhibition, P < 0.01), and histologic damage caused 
by toxin A. Thus, S. boulardii protease inhibits the intestinal effects of C. 
difficile toxin A by proteolysis of the toxin and inhibition of toxin A binding 
to its BB receptor. Our results may be relevant to the mechanism by which S. 
boulardii exerts its protective effects in C. difficile infection in humans.
