The role of the actin cytoskeleton and/or GTPases of the Rho/Rac-family in 
glucose transport regulation was investigated in 3T3-L1 cells with clostridial 
toxins which depolymerize actin by inactivation of Rho/Rac (Clostridium 
difficile toxin B and Clostiridium sordellii lethal toxin (LT)) or by direct 
ADP-ribosylation (Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin). Toxin B and C2 reduced 
insulin-stimulated, but not basal, 2-deoxyglucose (2-DOG) uptake rates in 3T3-L1 
fibroblasts. In parallel, the toxins produced morphological alterations of the 
cells reflecting disruption of the actin cytoskeleton. Both toxins reduced the 
maximum response to insulin but failed to alter the half-maximally stimulating 
concentrations of insulin. In 3T3-L1 adipocytes, the lethal toxin reduced the 
effect of insulin on 2-DOG uptake, whereas toxin B and C2 failed to affect 
glucose transport or cell morphology. When cells were exposed to the toxins 
after treatment with insulin, both toxin B and the lethal toxin, in contrast to 
the phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin, failed to reduce 
the 2-DOG uptake rates. Thus, both translocation to the plasma membrane and 
internalization of glucose transporters were inhibited by the toxins, whereas 
the PI 3-kinase inhibitor selectively affects translocation. The data suggest 
that the effects of the clostridial toxins on trafficking of glucose 
transporters are mediated by the depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton and 
are an indirect consequence of Rho or Rac inactivation. It is suggested that 
pathways signalling through Rac or Rho may play a modulatory role in glucose 
transport regulation through their effects on the actin network.
