Bacteroides fragilis constitutes about 1% of the bacterial flora in intestines 
of normal humans. Enterotoxigenic strains of B. fragilis have been associated 
with diarrheal diseases in humans and animals. The enterotoxin produced by these 
isolates induces fluid changes in ligated intestinal loops and an in vitro 
cytotoxic response in HT-29 cells. We developed a nested PCR to detect the 
enterotoxin gene of B. fragilis in stool specimens. After DNA extraction, a 
367-bp fragment was amplified with two outer primers. The amplicon from this 
reaction was subjected to a second round of amplification with a set of internal 
primers. With these inner primers, a 290-bp DNA fragment was obtained which was 
confirmed as part of the B. fragilis enterotoxin gene by Southern blotting with 
a nonradioactive internal probe and a chemiluminescence system. By this 
approach, B. fragilis enterotoxin gene sequences were detected in eight known 
enterotoxigenic human isolates and nine enterotoxigenic horse isolates. No 
amplification products were obtained from DNA extracted from 28 
nonenterotoxigenic B. fragilis isolates or B. distasonis, B. thetaiotaomicron, 
B. uniformis, B. ovatus, Escherichia coli, or Clostridium difficile. The 
sensitivity of this assay allowed us to detect as little as 1 pg of enterotoxin 
DNA sequences or 100 to 1,000 cells of enterotoxigenic B. fragilis/g of stool. 
Enterotoxin production of all isolates was confirmed in vitro in HT-29 cells. A 
100% correlation was obtained between enterotoxin detection by cytotoxin assay 
and the nested PCR assay. This rapid and sensitive assay can be used to identify 
enterotoxigenic B. fragilis and may be used clinically to determine the role of 
B. fragilis in diarrheal diseases.
