BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infections are associated with development of 
the systemic inflammatory response, including the production of hepatic acute 
phase proteins. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) directly stimulates the production of 
at least one of these proteins, a 23-kDa acute phase protein (the LPS-induced 
protein, or LIP) by murine hepatocytes in vitro. The aim of the present study 
was to determine if C. difficile toxins also stimulated the synthesis of this 
protein in vitro.
METHODS: Cultured murine hepatocytes were treated for 24 h with various 
concentrations of C. difficile culture extract or purified toxins A and B in the 
presence or absence of dexamethasone or interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor antagonist 
(IL-1 RA). The cells were then metabolically radiolabeled with [35S]methionine. 
Secretory proteins were identified using electrophoresis and autoradiography, 
and their synthesis was quantitated by image analysis of the autoradiograms.
RESULTS: The C. difficile culture extract, at dilutions as low as 1:200,000, 
significantly stimulated LIP synthesis in vitro. Toxins A and B, at 
concentrations as low as 1.6 and 0.02 pg/ml, respectively, also induced 
production of this protein. Dexamethasone further augmented C. difficile 
toxin-stimulated synthesis of LIP, but IL-1 RA inhibited the effects of these 
toxins on the synthesis of this protein. Only minimal quantities of IL-1 were 
found in culture supernatants following treatment with the toxins.
CONCLUSIONS: C. difficile toxins A and B, at very low concentrations, stimulate 
hepatocyte acute phase protein synthesis. Even though IL-1 RA inhibits this 
process, it does not appear that local production of IL-1 mediates the action of 
these toxins.
