1. J Vet Intern Med. 2011 Nov-Dec;25(6):1195-208. doi: 
10.1111/j.1939-1676.2011.00821.x. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Enteropathogenic bacteria in dogs and cats: diagnosis, epidemiology, treatment, 
and control.

Marks SL(1), Rankin SC, Byrne BA, Weese JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine & Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California, Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA. slmarks@ucdavis.edu

This report offers a consensus opinion on the diagnosis, epidemiology, 
treatment, and control of the primary enteropathogenic bacteria in dogs and 
cats, with an emphasis on Clostridium difficile, Clostridium perfringens, 
Campylobacter spp., Salmonella spp., and Escherichia coli associated with 
granulomatous colitis in Boxers. Veterinarians are challenged when attempting to 
diagnose animals with suspected bacterial-associated diarrhea because 
well-scrutinized practice guidelines that provide objective recommendations for 
implementing fecal testing are lacking. This problem is compounded by similar 
isolation rates for putative bacterial enteropathogens in animals with and 
without diarrhea, and by the lack of consensus among veterinary diagnostic 
laboratories as to which diagnostic assays should be utilized. Most bacterial 
enteropathogens are associated with self-limiting diarrhea, and injudicious 
administration of antimicrobials could be more harmful than beneficial. 
Salmonella and Campylobacter are well-documented zoonoses, but antimicrobial 
administration is not routinely advocated in uncomplicated cases and supportive 
therapy is recommended. Basic practices of isolation, use of appropriate 
protective equipment, and proper cleaning and disinfection are the mainstays of 
control. Handwashing with soap and water is preferred over use of alcohol-based 
hand sanitizers because spores of C. difficile and C. perfringens are 
alcohol-resistant, but susceptible to bleach (1:10 to 1:20 dilution of regular 
household bleach) and accelerated hydrogen peroxide. The implementation of 
practice guidelines in combination with the integration of validated 
molecular-based testing and conventional testing is pivotal if we are to 
optimize the identification and management of enteropathogenic bacteria in dogs 
and cats.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-1676.2011.00821.x
PMID: 22092607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nature. 2010 Oct 7;467(7316):711-3. doi: 10.1038/nature09397. Epub 2010 Sep 15.

The role of toxin A and toxin B in Clostridium difficile infection.

Kuehne SA(1), Cartman ST, Heap JT, Kelly ML, Cockayne A, Minton NP.

Author information:
(1)Clostridia Research Group, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, School of 
Molecular Medical Sciences, Nottingham Digestive Diseases Centre, NIHR 
Biomedical Research Unit, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2010 Oct 7;467(7316):665-6.
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Dec;7(12):654.

Clostridium difficile infection is the leading cause of healthcare-associated 
diarrhoea in Europe and North America. During infection, C. difficile produces 
two key virulence determinants, toxin A and toxin B. Experiments with purified 
toxins have indicated that toxin A alone is able to evoke the symptoms of C. 
difficile infection, but toxin B is unable to do so unless it is mixed with 
toxin A or there is prior damage to the gut mucosa. However, a recent study 
indicated that toxin B is essential for C. difficile virulence and that a strain 
producing toxin A alone was avirulent. This creates a paradox over the 
individual importance of toxin A and toxin B. Here we show that isogenic mutants 
of C. difficile producing either toxin A or toxin B alone can cause fulminant 
disease in the hamster model of infection. By using a gene knockout system to 
inactivate the toxin genes permanently, we found that C. difficile producing 
either one or both toxins showed cytotoxic activity in vitro that translated 
directly into virulence in vivo. Furthermore, by constructing the first ever 
double-mutant strain of C. difficile, in which both toxin genes were 
inactivated, we were able to completely attenuate virulence. Our findings 
re-establish the importance of both toxin A and toxin B and highlight the need 
to continue to consider both toxins in the development of diagnostic tests and 
effective countermeasures against C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1038/nature09397
PMID: 20844489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Front Microbiol. 2018 Dec 21;9:2976. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02976. eCollection 
2018.

Bacteroides fragilis Prevents Clostridium difficile Infection in a Mouse Model 
by Restoring Gut Barrier and Microbiome Regulation.

Deng H(1), Yang S(1), Zhang Y(1), Qian K(1), Zhang Z(1), Liu Y(2), Wang Y(2), 
Bai Y(1), Fan H(3), Zhao X(1), Zhi F(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of 
Gastroenterology, Institute of Gastroenterology of Guangdong Province, Nanfang 
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangzhou ZhiYi Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of 
Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Erratum in
    Front Microbiol. 2019 Apr 02;10:601.

Clostridium difficile is currently the leading cause of nosocomial infection. 
Antibiotics remain the first-line therapy for C. difficile-associated diseases 
(CDAD), despite the risks of resistance promotion and further gut microbiota 
perturbation. Notably, the abundance of Bacteroides fragilis was reported to be 
significantly decreased in CDAD patients. This study aimed to clarify the 
prophylactic effects of B. fragilis strain ZY-312 in a mouse model of C. 
difficile infection (CDI). The CDI mouse model was successfully created using C. 
difficile strain VPI 10463 spores, as confirmed by lethal diarrhea (12.5% 
survival rate), serious gut barrier disruption, and microbiota disruption. CDI 
model mice prophylactically treated with B. fragilis exhibited significantly 
higher survival rates (100% in low dosage group, 87.5% in high dosage group) and 
improved clinical manifestations. Histopathological analysis of colon and cecum 
tissue samples revealed an intact gut barrier with strong ZO-1 and Muc-2 
expression. The bacterial diversity and relative abundance of gut microbiota 
were significantly improved. Interestingly, the relative abundance of 
Akkermansia muciniphila was positively correlated with B. fragilis treatment. In 
vitro experiments showed that B. fragilis inhibited C. difficile adherence, and 
attenuated the decrease in CDI-induced transepithelial electrical resistance, 
ZO-1 and MUC-2 loss, and apoptosis, suggesting that B. fragilis protected 
against CDI possibly by resisting pathogen colonization and improving gut 
barrier integrity and functions. In summary, B. fragilis exerted protective 
effects on a CDI mouse model by modulating gut microbiota and alleviating 
barrier destruction, thereby relieving epithelial stress and pathogenic colitis 
triggered by C. difficile. This study provides an alternative preventative 
measure for CDI and lays the foundations for further investigations of the 
relationships among opportunistic pathogens, commensal microbiota, and the gut 
barrier.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02976
PMCID: PMC6308121
PMID: 30619112


4. Zoonoses Public Health. 2019 Sep;66(6):618-621. doi: 10.1111/zph.12613. Epub 
2019 Jun 11.

Clostridium difficile shedding by healthy dogs in Nigeria and Malawi.

Weese JS(1), Mshelbwala PP(2), Lohr F(3).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary Colllege, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Abuja, Abuja, Nigeria.
(3)Mission Rabies, Cranborne, UK.

The objectives of this study were to determine the prevalence and 
characteristics of Clostridium difficile shedding in owned dogs in Nigeria and 
Malawi. Clostridium difficile was isolated from 31/120 (26%) dogs in Nigeria and 
11/92 (12%) dogs in Malawi (p = 0.012). Overall, 22/42 (52%) isolates were 
toxigenic; 17/31 (55%) from Nigeria and 5/11 (45%) from Malawi. All toxigenic 
isolates possessing tcdA and tcdB, and only one also possessed cdtA/B. Sixteen 
different ribotypes were found, ten (63%) of which were non-toxigenic. Most 
isolates corresponded to ribotypes that have been previously identified in 
humans or livestock. The role of dogs in transmission of C. difficile and the 
clinical implications of C. difficile shedding in dogs remain unclear. These 
data indicate that dogs could act as a source of C. difficile for exposure of 
other species, including humans; however, the true risk is unknown. Further 
study of the ecology of C. difficile and the role of dogs in disease of humans 
and other domestic animals is indicated.

© 2019 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/zph.12613
PMID: 31187579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3114. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4114.

Antibiotic-induced shifts in the mouse gut microbiome and metabolome increase 
susceptibility to Clostridium difficile infection.

Theriot CM(1), Koenigsknecht MJ(2), Carlson PE Jr(3), Hatton GE(4), Nelson 
AM(1), Li B(5), Huffnagle GB(6), Z Li J(5), Young VB(2).

Author information:
(1)1] Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, The 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2] Division of Pulmonary 
and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, The University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
(2)1] Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, The 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA [2] Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
48109, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, The 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
48109, USA.
(6)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Antibiotics can have significant and long-lasting effects on the 
gastrointestinal tract microbiota, reducing colonization resistance against 
pathogens including Clostridium difficile. Here we show that antibiotic 
treatment induces substantial changes in the gut microbial community and in the 
metabolome of mice susceptible to C. difficile infection. Levels of secondary 
bile acids, glucose, free fatty acids and dipeptides decrease, whereas those of 
primary bile acids and sugar alcohols increase, reflecting the modified 
metabolic activity of the altered gut microbiome. In vitro and ex vivo analyses 
demonstrate that C. difficile can exploit specific metabolites that become more 
abundant in the mouse gut after antibiotics, including the primary bile acid 
taurocholate for germination, and carbon sources such as mannitol, fructose, 
sorbitol, raffinose and stachyose for growth. Our results indicate that 
antibiotic-mediated alteration of the gut microbiome converts the global 
metabolic profile to one that favours C. difficile germination and growth.

DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4114
PMCID: PMC3950275
PMID: 24445449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Gastroenterology. 2008 Dec;135(6):1984-92. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.09.002. 
Epub 2008 Sep 10.

A mouse model of Clostridium difficile-associated disease.

Chen X(1), Katchar K, Goldsmith JD, Nanthakumar N, Cheknis A, Gerding DN, Kelly 
CP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Infection with Clostridium difficile causes nosocomial 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis. Hamsters historically have been used 
to investigate disease pathogenesis and treatment, but are not ideal models 
because of the lack of hamster-specific reagents and genetically modified 
animals, and because they develop fulminant disease. The aim of this study was 
to establish a mouse model of antibiotic-induced C. difficile-associated disease 
(CDAD) that more closely resembles human disease.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were exposed to a mixture of antibiotics (kanamycin, 
gentamicin, colistin, metronidazole, and vancomycin) for 3 days. Two days later, 
they were given injections of clindamycin and then challenged 1 day later with 
different doses of C. difficile.
RESULTS: Mice that were exposed to antibiotics and then challenged with C. 
difficile developed diarrhea and lost weight. Disease severity varied from 
fulminant to minimal in accordance with the challenge dose. Typical histologic 
features of CDAD were evident. Oral vancomycin prevented CDAD in all mice, but 
68% died from colitis after treatment was discontinued. All animals that 
survived an initial episode of CDAD showed no evidence of diarrhea or colitis 
after subsequent rechallenge with C. difficile. Different strains of C. 
difficile tested in the model showed different levels of virulence in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We have developed a mouse model of CDAD that closely represents the 
human disease. In light of the recent substantial increases in CDAD incidence 
and severity, this model will be valuable in testing new treatments, examining 
disease pathogenesis, and elucidating mechanisms of protective immunity.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.09.002
PMID: 18848941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2019 Jul;69(1):35-40. doi: 10.1111/lam.13159. Epub 2019 May 
2.

Clostridium difficile in wild rodents and insectivores in the Netherlands.

Krijger IM(1)(2), Meerburg BG(1)(3), Harmanus C(4), Burt SA(5).

Author information:
(1)Livestock Research, Wageningen University & Research, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Farm Technology Group, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Dutch Pest and Wildlife Expertise Centre (KAD), Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Division of Environmental Epidemiology & Veterinary Public Health, Institute 
for Risk Assessment Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

With wild rodents and insectivores being present around humans and their living, 
working and food production environments, it is important to gain knowledge of 
the zoonotic pathogens present in these animals. The enteropathogen Clostridium 
difficile, an opportunistic anaerobic bacteria, can be carried by both animals 
and humans, and is distributed globally. It is known that there is genetic 
overlap between human and animal sources of C. difficile. In this study, the aim 
was to assess the presence of C. difficile in rodents and insectivores trapped 
on and around pig and cattle farms in the Netherlands. In total 347 rodents and 
insectivores (10 different species) were trapped and 39·2% tested positive for 
presence of C. difficile. For all positive samples the ribotype (RT) was 
determined, and in total there were 13 different RTs found (in descending order 
of frequency: 057, 010, 029, 005, 073, 078, 015, 035, 454, 014, 058, 062, 087). 
Six of the RTs isolated from rodents and insectivores are known to be associated 
with human C. difficile infection; RT005, RT010, RT014, RT015, RT078 and RT087. 
The presence of rodents and insectivores in and around food production buildings 
(e.g. farms) could contribute to the spread of C. difficile in the human 
environment. In order to enable on-farm management for pathogen control, it is 
essential to comprehend the role of wild rodents and insectivores that could 
potentially affect the ecology of disease agents on farms. SIGNIFICANCE AND 
IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study shows that rodents and insectivores in and 
around food production buildings (e.g. farms) can carry Clostridium difficile 
ribotypes associated with human C. difficile infection (CDI). C. difficile 
spores in rodent and insectivore droppings are able to survive in the 
environment for prolonged periods, leading to host-to-host exposure and 
transmission. Therefore we can state that rodent and insectivore presence on 
farms is a risk for zoonotic pathogen transmission of C. difficile.

© 2019 The Authors. Letters in Applied Microbiology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13159
PMCID: PMC6849583
PMID: 30958895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest declared.


8. Nature. 2018 Jan 18;553(7688):291-294. doi: 10.1038/nature25178. Epub 2018 Jan 
3.

Dietary trehalose enhances virulence of epidemic Clostridium difficile.

Collins J(1), Robinson C(2), Danhof H(1), Knetsch CW(3), van Leeuwen HC(3), 
Lawley TD(4), Auchtung JM(1), Britton RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular Virology and 
Microbiology, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(2)University of Oregon, Institute for Molecular Biology, 1318 Franklin 
Boulevard, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA.
(3)Leiden University Medical Centre, Department of Medical Microbiology, 
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(4)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2018 Jan 18;553(7688):285-286.
    Cell Host Microbe. 2018 Feb 14;23 (2):156-158.

Clostridium difficile disease has recently increased to become a dominant 
nosocomial pathogen in North America and Europe, although little is known about 
what has driven this emergence. Here we show that two epidemic ribotypes (RT027 
and RT078) have acquired unique mechanisms to metabolize low concentrations of 
the disaccharide trehalose. RT027 strains contain a single point mutation in the 
trehalose repressor that increases the sensitivity of this ribotype to trehalose 
by more than 500-fold. Furthermore, dietary trehalose increases the virulence of 
a RT027 strain in a mouse model of infection. RT078 strains acquired a cluster 
of four genes involved in trehalose metabolism, including a PTS permease that is 
both necessary and sufficient for growth on low concentrations of trehalose. We 
propose that the implementation of trehalose as a food additive into the human 
diet, shortly before the emergence of these two epidemic lineages, helped select 
for their emergence and contributed to hypervirulence.

DOI: 10.1038/nature25178
PMCID: PMC5984069
PMID: 29310122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


9. Anaerobe. 2017 Jun;45:3-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.02.018. Epub 2017 Feb 
22.

Updates on Clostridium difficile spore biology.

Gil F(1), Lagos-Moraga S(1), Calderón-Romero P(1), Pizarro-Guajardo M(1), 
Paredes-Sabja D(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andrés Bello, 
Santiago, Chile.
(2)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andrés Bello, 
Santiago, Chile. Electronic address: daniel.paredes.sabja@gmail.com.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive, anaerobic spore former, and an 
important nosocomial pathogenic bacterium. C. difficile spores are the 
morphotype of transmission and recurrence of the disease. The formation of 
C. difficile spores and their subsequent germination are essential processes 
during the infection. Recent in vitro and in vivo work has shed light on how 
spores are formed and the timing of in vivo sporulation in a mouse model. 
Advances have also been made in our understanding of the machineries involved in 
spore germination, and how antibiotic-induced dysbiosis affects the metabolism 
of bile salts and thus impacts C. difficile germination in vivo. Studies have 
also attempted to identify how C. difficile spores interact with the host's 
intestinal mucosa. Spore resistance has also been revisited by several groups 
highlighting the extreme resistance of this morphotype to traditional food 
processing regimes and disinfectants used in clinical settings. Therefore, the 
aim of this review is to summarize recent advances on spore 
formation/germination in vitro and in vivo, spore-host interactions, and spore 
resistance that contribute to our knowledge of the role of C. difficile spores 
in the infectious process.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.02.018
PMID: 28254263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Anaerobe. 2017 Dec;48:66-69. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.07.001. Epub 2017 Jul 
19.

Clostridium perfringens and C. difficile in parvovirus-positive dogs.

Silva ROS(1), Dorella FA(2), Figueiredo HCP(2), Costa ÉA(2), Pelicia V(3), 
Ribeiro BLD(3), Ribeiro MG(3), Paes AC(3), Megid J(3), Lobato FCF(2).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Av. Antônio 
Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, CEP 31.270-901, Brazil. Electronic address: 
rodrigo.otaviosilva@gmail.com.
(2)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Av. Antônio 
Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, CEP 31.270-901, Brazil.
(3)UNESP-São Paulo State University, Department of Veterinary Hygiene and Public 
Health, Botucatu, SP, Brazil.

The aim of this study was to investigate Clostridium difficile and Clostridium 
perfringens in 82 diarrheic dogs positive for canine parvovirus type 2 (CPV). 
Enterotoxigenic C. perfringens type A was isolated from three (3.6%) dogs. One 
(1.2%) strain was also positive for NetE- and NetF-encoding genes, which are 
commonly associated with diarrhea in dogs. Toxigenic C. difficile was isolated 
from one animal (1.2%), which was also positive for A/B toxins. The present 
study identified C. difficile and C. perfringens infection in CPV-positive dogs. 
Further studies are necessary to clarify if clostridial infections may 
predispose or potentiate CPV-infection in dogs or vice versa.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.07.001
PMCID: PMC7110995
PMID: 28733230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Vet Microbiol. 2019 Dec;239:108433. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2019.108433. Epub 2019 
Sep 29.

Prevalence of Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens in Swiss horses 
with and without gastrointestinal disease and microbiota composition in relation 
to Clostridium difficile shedding.

Schoster A(1), Kunz T(2), Lauper M(3), Graubner C(4), Schmitt S(5), Weese JS(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Zurich, Vetsuisse Faculty, Equine Department, 
Winterthurerstrasse 260, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
aschoster@vetclinics.uzh.ch.
(2)University of Zurich, Vetsuisse Faculty, Equine Department, 
Winterthurerstrasse 260, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
tanja.kunz@uzh.ch.
(3)University of Berne, Vetsuisse Faculty, Institut Suisse de Médicine Equine, 
Länggassstrasse 124, 3012 Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
Murielle.lauper@vetsuisse.unibe.ch.
(4)University of Berne, Vetsuisse Faculty, Institut Suisse de Médicine Equine, 
Länggassstrasse 124, 3012 Bern, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
claudia.Graubner@vetsuisse.unibe.ch.
(5)University of Zurich, Vetsuisse Faculty, Section of Veterinary Bacteriology, 
Winterthurerstrasse 270, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: 
sarah.schmitt@vetbakt.uzh.ch.
(6)University of Guelph, Ontario Veterinary College, Department of Pathobiology, 
N1G2W1 Guelph, Canada. Electronic address: jsweese@uoguelph.ca.

Overgrowth of enteric clostridia in dysbiosis in horses with colic is presumed 
but scarcely investigated. The objective was to provide prevalence data of 
Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens in horses with and without 
gastrointestinal disease in Switzerland, and investigate microbiota differences 
between C. difficile shedders and non-shedders. Fecal samples were taken from 
healthy horses (n = 103), horses with colic (n = 98) and horses with diarrhea 
(n = 151). Colic horses were sampled on three days. Selective enrichment culture 
and molecular typing for C. difficile and C. perfringens was performed. 
Microbiota differences between horses with colic shedding (n = 7) and not 
shedding (n = 7) C. difficile were assessed using metagenomic sequencing. The 
cumulative prevalence (19% C. difficile; 16% C. perfringens) was higher compared 
to single day samples (1-10% C. difficile; 3-8% C. perfringens, all p < 0.003). 
Horses with colic shed significantly more C. difficile (p < 0.001) but not C. 
perfringens (p = 0.09) compared to healthy horses. Prevalence in horses with 
diarrhea was 8% for both Clostridium species. There were no significant 
microbiota differences between C. difficile shedders and non-shedders with 
regards to relative abundance on any phylogenetic level, and alpha diversity. 
Limited differences were seen on LEfSE analysis and in beta diversity indices. 
Multiple fecal samples should be taken when investigating shedding of enteric 
clostridia. As horses with colic shed more enteric clostridia compared to 
healthy horses special biosecurity protocols for horses with colic should be 
considered in hospitals. Differences in microbiota composition between C. 
difficile shedders and non-shedders were limited. Further studies on the role of 
dysbiosis in C. difficile are needed.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2019.108433
PMID: 31767096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2019 Jul 2;10:55. doi: 10.1186/s40104-019-0363-4. 
eCollection 2019.

Potential relevance of pig gut content transplantation for production and 
research.

Canibe N(1), O'Dea M(2), Abraham S(2).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Animal Science, Aarhus University, AU-FOULUM, PO BOX 50, 8830 
Tjele, Denmark.
(2)2Antimicrobial Resistance and Infectious Disease laboratory, College of 
Science, Health, Engineering and Education, Murdoch University, Western 
Australia, Australia.

It is becoming increasingly evident that the gastrointestinal microbiota has a 
significant impact on the overall health and production of the pig. This has led 
to intensified research on the composition of the gastrointestinal microbiota, 
factors affecting it, and the impact of the microbiota on health, growth 
performance, and more recently, behavior of the host. Swine production research 
has been heavily focused on assessing the effects of feed additives and dietary 
modifications to alter or take advantage of select characteristics of 
gastrointestinal microbes to improve health and feed conversion efficiency. 
Research on faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) as a possible tool to 
improve outcomes in pigs through manipulation of the gastrointestinal microbiome 
is very recent and limited data is available. Results on FMT in humans 
demonstrating the transfer of phenotypic traits from donors to recipients and 
the high efficacy of FMT to treat Clostridium difficile infections in humans, 
together with data from pigs relating GI-tract microbiota composition with 
growth performance has likely played an important role in the interest towards 
this strategy in pig production. However, several factors can influence the 
impact of FMT on the recipient, and these need to be identified and optimized 
before this tool can be applied to pig production. There are obvious inherent 
biosecurity and regulatory issues in this strategy, since the donor's microbiome 
can never be completely screened for all possible non-desirable microorganisms. 
However, considering the success observed in humans, it seems worth 
investigating this strategy for certain applications in pig production. Further, 
FMT research may lead to the identification of specific bacterial group(s) 
essential for a particular outcome, resulting in the development of banks of 
clones which can be used as targeted therapeutics, rather than the broader 
approach applied in FMT. This review examines the factors associated with the 
use of FMT, and its potential application to swine production, and includes 
research on using the pig as model for human medical purposes.

DOI: 10.1186/s40104-019-0363-4
PMCID: PMC6604143
PMID: 31304012

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.


13. BMC Infect Dis. 2019 Jan 11;19(1):46. doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-3678-z.

Prevalence, genotype and antimicrobial resistance of Clostridium difficile 
isolates from healthy pets in Eastern China.

Wei Y(1), Sun M(2), Zhang Y(2), Gao J(2), Kong F(2), Liu D(3), Yu H(2), Du J(2), 
Tang R(4).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Laboratory of Infection 
and Immunity, Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology/School of 
Stomatology, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, 22104, Jiangsu Province, China. 
weiyx2007@aliyun.com.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Laboratory of Infection 
and Immunity, Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology/School of 
Stomatology, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, 22104, Jiangsu Province, China.
(3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Laboratory of Infection 
and Immunity, Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology/School of 
Stomatology, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, 22104, Jiangsu Province, China. 
dianbin0820@163.com.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Immunity and Metabolism, Laboratory of Infection 
and Immunity, Department of Pathogenic Biology and Immunology/School of 
Stomatology, Xuzhou Medical University, Xuzhou, 22104, Jiangsu Province, China. 
tangrenxian-t@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) is a main cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea in humans. Several studies have been performed 
to reveal the prevalence rate of C. difficile in cats and dogs. However, little 
is known about the epidemiology of C. difficile in healthy pets in China. This 
study aimed to assess the burden of C. difficile shedding by healthy dogs and 
cats in China. Furthermore, the genetic diversity and antimicrobial 
susceptibility patterns of the recovered isolates were determined.
METHODS: A total of 175 faecal samples were collected from 146 healthy dogs and 
29 cats. C. difficile strains were isolated and identified from the feces of 
these pets. The characterized C. difficile strains were typed by multilocus 
sequence typing (MLST), and the MICs of the isolates were determined against 
ampicillin, clindamycin, tetracycline, moxifloxacin, chloramphenicol, cefoxitin, 
metronidazole and vancomycin by the agar dilution method.
RESULTS: Overall, 3 faecal samples (1.7%) were C. difficile culture positive. 
One sample (0.7%) from a dog was C. difficile culture positive, while two cats 
(7.0%) yielded positive cultures. The prevalence rate differed significantly 
between cats and dogs. These isolates were typed into 3 MLST genotypes and were 
susceptible to chloramphenicol, tetracycline, metronidazole and moxifloxacin and 
resistant to ampicillin, clindamycin and cefoxitin. Notably, one strain, D141-1, 
which was resistant to three kinds of antibiotics and carried toxin genes, was 
recovered in the faeces of a healthy dog.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that common pets may be a source of pathogenic 
C. difficile, indicating that household transmission of C. difficile from pets 
to humans can not be excluded.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-019-3678-z
PMCID: PMC6330442
PMID: 30634930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: Ethical approval for this study 
was obtained from the Laboratory Animal Welfare and Ethics Committee (LAWEC) of 
Xuzhou Medical University, China (No. SCXK<SU> 2010–0003) and verbal consent was 
obtained from all pet shop owners. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that 
this study was performed in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


14. BMC Vet Res. 2018 Mar 9;14(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s12917-018-1402-7.

Preliminary studies on isolates of Clostridium difficile from dogs and exotic 
pets.

Andrés-Lasheras S(1), Martín-Burriel I(2), Mainar-Jaime RC(1), Morales M(1)(3), 
Kuijper E(4), Blanco JL(5), Chirino-Trejo M(6), Bolea R(7).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Patología Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Instituto 
Agroalimentario de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), 50013, 
Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Laboratorio de Genética Bioquímica (LAGENBIO), Facultad de Veterinaria, 
Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), 
Zaragoza, Spain.
(3)Laboratorios Albéitar, Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Centre of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Departamento de Sanidad Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad 
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.
(7)Departamento de Patología Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Instituto 
Agroalimentario de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), 50013, 
Zaragoza, Spain. rbolea@unizar.es.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is recognised as an emerging 
disease in both humans and some animal species. During the past few years, 
insights into human CDI epidemiology changed and C. difficile is also considered 
as an emerging community-acquired pathogen. Certain ribotypes (RT) are possibly 
associated with zoonotic transmission. The objective of this study was to assess 
the presence of C. difficile in a population of pets and to characterise the 
isolates.
RESULTS: Faecal samples from a total of 90 diarrhoeic dogs and 24 from exotic 
animal species (both diarrhoeic and non-diarrhoeic) were analysed. Clostridium 
difficile was isolated from 6 (6.7%) dogs and one reptile sample (4.2%). Four 
(66.7%) of the six dog strains were capable of producing toxins. Four known 
different RTs were detected in dogs (010, 014, 123 and 358) and a new one was 
found in a faecal sample of an exotic animal. This new RT isolate was negative 
for all toxin genes tested and belonged to sequence type 347 which has been 
proposed as a Clade-III member. Importantly, two dog strains showed a stable 
resistance to metronidazole (initial MIC values: 128 and 48 μg/ml).
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained in this study suggest the implementation of 
antimicrobial susceptibility surveillance programs to assess the prevalence of 
metronidazole resistance in dogs; molecular studies to elucidate C. difficile 
metronidazole resistance mechanisms are warranted. Based on the similarity 
between the ribotypes observed in dogs and those described in humans, the 
zoonotic transmission should be further explored. Furthermore, exotic animals 
have shown to harbor uncommon C. difficile strains which require further genomic 
studies.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-018-1402-7
PMCID: PMC5845233
PMID: 29523201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.


15. Front Microbiol. 2018 May 23;9:1009. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01009. eCollection 
2018.

Targeting Clostridium difficile Surface Components to Develop Immunotherapeutic 
Strategies Against Clostridium difficile Infection.

Péchiné S(1), Bruxelle JF(1), Janoir C(1), Collignon A(1).

Author information:
(1)EA 4043, Unités Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé, Université Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France.

New therapies are needed to prevent and treat Clostridium difficile infection 
and to limit the rise in antibiotic resistance. Besides toxins, several surface 
components have been characterized as colonization factors and have been shown 
as immunogenic. This review will focus on passive and active immunization 
strategies targeting C. difficile surface components to combat C. difficile. 
Concerning passive immunization, the first strategies used antisera raised 
against the entire bacterium to prevent infection in the hamster model. Then, 
surface components such as the flagellin and the S-layer proteins were used for 
immunization and the passive transfer of antibodies was protective in animal 
models. Passive immunotherapy with polyvalent immunoglobulins was used in humans 
and bovine immunoglobulin concentrates were evaluated in clinical trials. 
Concerning active immunization, vaccine assays targeting surface components were 
tested mainly in animal models, mouse models of colonization and hamster models 
of infection. Bacterial extracts, spore proteins and surface components of 
vegetative cells such as cell wall proteins, flagellar proteins, and 
polysaccharides were used as vaccine targets. Vaccine assays were performed by 
parenteral and mucosal routes of immunization. Both gave promising results and 
pave the way to development of new vaccines.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01009
PMCID: PMC5974105
PMID: 29875742


16. Heliyon. 2019 May 13;5(5):e01629. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01629. 
eCollection 2019 May.

Clostridium difficile beyond stools: dog nasal discharge as a possible new 
vector of bacterial transmission.

Rodriguez C(1), Taminiau B(1), Bouchafa L(1), Romijn S(2), Van Broeck J(3), 
Delmée M(3), Clercx C(2), Daube G(1).

Author information:
(1)Fundamental and Applied Research for Animal & Health (FARAH), Department of 
Food Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, 
Sart-Tilman 4000, Liège, Belgium.
(2)Fundamental and Applied Research for Animal & Health (FARAH), Department of 
Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Division of Companion Animal Internal Medicine, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Sart-Tilman 4000, Liège, 
Belgium.
(3)National Reference Center Clostridium difficile, Microbiology Unit, Catholic 
University of Louvain, Avenue Hippocrate 54, Bte B1. 5405, 1200, Brussels, 
Belgium.

Erratum in
    Heliyon. 2019 Jun 14;5(6):e01890.

Zoonotic transmission of Clostridium difficile has been largely hypothesised to 
occur after direct or indirect contact with contaminated animal faeces. Recent 
studies have reported the presence of the bacterium in the natural environment, 
including in soils and rivers. If C. difficile spores are scattered in the 
environment, they can easily enter the respiratory tract of dogs, and therefore, 
dog nasal discharge could be a direct route of transmission not previously 
investigated. This study reports for the first time the presence of C. difficile 
in the respiratory tracts of dogs. The bacterium was isolated from 6 (17.1%) out 
of 35 nasal samples, with a total of 4 positive dogs (19%). C. difficile was 
recovered from both proximal and distal nasal cavities. All isolates were 
toxigenic and belonged to PCR-ribotype 014, which is one of the most predominant 
types in animals and in community-acquired C. difficile infections in recent 
years. The findings of this study demonstrate that the nasal cavity of dogs is 
contaminated with toxigenic C. difficile, and therefore, its secretions could be 
considered as a new route by which bacteria are spread and transmitted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01629
PMCID: PMC6520566
PMID: 31193177


17. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2020 Jan;70(1):29-35. doi: 10.1111/lam.13238. Epub 2019 Nov 
29.

Isolation and characterization of Clostridium difficile from a small survey of 
wastewater, food and animals in New Zealand.

Rivas L(1), Dupont PY(1), Gilpin BJ(1), Cornelius AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Health and Environment, Institute of Environmental Science and Research, 
Christchurch Science Centre, Christchurch, New Zealand.

The objective of this study was to undertake a microbiological survey of foods, 
animal faeces and wastewater samples for Clostridium difficile, and determine 
the genotypes and antimicrobial susceptibilities of isolates. A total of 211 
samples were tested for C. difficile using culture methods. Thirteen toxigenic 
C. difficile isolates were obtained; ten from wastewater samples, one each from 
pig and duck faeces and another from a raw meat product. Eight PCR-ribotypes 
(RTs) were identified, including two novel RTs (878 and 879). Single-nucleotide 
polymorphism analysis using WGS data for all isolates provided greater 
discrimination between C. difficile isolates within the same RT and multilocus 
sequence typing (MLST) profiles. All C. difficile isolates were found to be 
susceptible to the first-line human antimicrobials used to treat C. difficile 
infection. SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This is the first study to 
report the isolation of Clostridium difficile from animals, food and wastewater 
in New Zealand (NZ) and provides important data with respect to ribotypes and 
multilocus sequence typing profiles, whole genome sequence and antimicrobial 
susceptibilities. The results highlight the need for further investigations into 
the epidemiology of C. difficile in NZ and to elucidate the role of the 
environmental and food sources as transmission routes of human infection.

© 2019 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13238
PMID: 31631350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2019 Jan 15;14(1):e0210798. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210798. 
eCollection 2019.

Oral Candida administration in a Clostridium difficile mouse model worsens 
disease severity but is attenuated by Bifidobacterium.

Panpetch W(1), Somboonna N(2), Palasuk M(2), Hiengrach P(1), Finkelman M(3), 
Tumwasorn S(1), Leelahavanichkul A(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Associates of Cape Cod, Inc., East Falmouth, MA, USA.
(4)Center of Excellence in Immunology and Immune-mediated Diseases, Department 
of Microbiology, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Gut fungi may influence the course of Clostridium difficile infection either 
positively or negatively for the host. Fungi are not prominent in the mouse gut, 
and C. albicans, the major human gastrointestinal commensal yeast, is in low 
abundance or absent in mice. Bifidobacterium is one of the probiotics that may 
attenuate the severity of C. difficile infection. Inflammatory synergy between 
C. albicans and C. difficile, in gut, may provide a state that more closely 
resembles human infection and be more suitable for testing probiotic effects. We 
performed fecal mycobiota analysis and administered C. albicans at 1 day prior 
to C. difficile dosing. Fecal eukaryotic 18S rDNA analysis demonstrated the 
presence of Ascomycota, specifically, Candida spp., after oral antibiotics, 
despite negative fecal fungal culture. C. albicans administration enhanced the 
severity of the C. difficile infection model as determined by mortality rate, 
weight loss, gut leakage (FITC-dextran assay), and serum and intestinal tissue 
cytokines. This occurred without increased fecal C. difficile or bacteremia, in 
comparison with C. difficile gavage alone. Candida lysate with C. difficile 
increased IL-8 production from HT-29 and Caco-2 human intestinal epithelial 
cell-lines. Bifidobacterium attenuated the disease severity of the C. difficile 
plus Candida model. The reduced severity was associated with decreased Candida 
burdens in feces. In conclusion, gut C. albicans worsened C. difficile 
infection, possibly through exacerbation of inflammation. Hence, a mouse model 
of Clostridium difficile infection with C. albicans present in the gut may 
better model the human patient condition. Gut fungal mycobiome investigation in 
patients with C. difficile is warranted and may suggest therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210798
PMCID: PMC6333342
PMID: 30645630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: MF received salary 
from Cape Cod Inc. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.


19. Vet Pathol. 2019 Nov;56(6):959-963. doi: 10.1177/0300985819864307. Epub 2019 Aug 
5.

Clostridium difficile Enterocolitis in a Captive Geoffroy's Spider Monkey 
(Ateles geoffroyi) and Common Marmosets (Callithrix jacchus).

Armstrong AR(1), Wünschmann A(1), Rigatti LH(2), Klein EC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, 
USA.
(2)University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Clostridium difficile is a well-documented cause of enterocolitis in several 
species, including humans, with limited documentation in New World nonhuman 
primates. We report several cases of C. difficile-associated pseudomembranous 
enterocolitis, including a case in a Geoffroy's spider monkey (Ateles geoffroyi) 
and several cases in common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus). The histologic 
lesions included a spectrum of severity, with most cases characterized by the 
classic "volcano" lesions described in humans and several other animal species. 
C. difficile was isolated from the colon of the spider monkey, while the 
presence of toxin A or toxin B or of the genes of toxin A or B by polymerase 
chain reaction served as corroborative evidence in several affected marmosets. 
C. difficile should be considered a cause of enterocolitis in these species.

DOI: 10.1177/0300985819864307
PMID: 31382854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Food Res Int. 2018 Nov;113:456-464. doi: 10.1016/j.foodres.2018.07.040. Epub 
2018 Jul 30.

Distribution and tracking of Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens 
in a free-range pig abattoir and processing plant.

Álvarez-Pérez S(1), Blanco JL(2), Astorga RJ(3), Gómez-Laguna J(4), 
Barrero-Domínguez B(3), Galán-Relaño A(3), Harmanus C(5), Kuijper E(5), García 
ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Complutense 
University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Complutense 
University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jlblanco@ucm.es.
(3)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Comparative Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Cordoba, Cordoba, Spain.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Center of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The presence and genetic diversity of Clostridium difficile and C. perfringens 
along the slaughtering process of pigs reared in a free-range system was 
assessed. A total of 270 samples from trucks, lairage, slaughter line and 
quartering were analyzed, and recovered isolates were toxinotyped and genotyped. 
C. difficile and C. perfringens were retrieved from 14.4% and 12.6% of samples, 
respectively. The highest percentage of positive samples for C. difficile was 
detected in trucks (80%) whereas C. perfringens was more prevalent in cecal and 
colonic samples obtained in the slaughter line (85% and 45%, respectively). C. 
difficile isolates (n = 105) were classified into 17 PCR ribotypes (including 
010, 078, and 126) and 95 AFLP genotypes. C. perfringens isolates (n = 85) 
belonged to toxinotypes A (94.1%) and C (5.9%) and were classified into 80 AFLP 
genotypes. The same genotypes of C. difficile and C. perfringens were isolated 
from different pigs and occasionally from environmental samples, suggesting a 
risk of contaminated meat products.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.foodres.2018.07.040
PMID: 30195542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Expert Rev Vaccines. 2013 Apr;12(4):421-31. doi: 10.1586/erv.13.9.

Carbohydrate-based Clostridium difficile vaccines.

Monteiro MA(1), Ma Z, Bertolo L, Jiao Y, Arroyo L, Hodgins D, Mallozzi M, 
Vedantam G, Sagermann M, Sundsmo J, Chow H.

Author information:
(1)University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. monteiro@uoguelph.ca

Clostridium difficile is responsible for thousands of deaths each year and a 
vaccine would be welcomed, especially one that would disrupt bacterial 
maintenance, colonization and persistence in carriers and convalescent patients. 
Structural explorations at the University of Guelph (ON, Canada) discovered that 
C. difficile may express three phosphorylated polysaccharides, named PSI, PSII 
and PSIII; this review captures our recent efforts to create vaccines based on 
these glycans, especially PSII, the common antigen that has precipitated 
immediate attention. The authors describe the design and immunogenicity of 
vaccines composed of raw polysaccharides and conjugates thereof. So far, it has 
been observed that anti-PSII antibodies can be raised in farm animals, mice and 
hamster models; humans and horses carry anti-PSII IgA and IgG antibodies from 
natural exposure to C. difficile, respectively; phosphate is an indispensable 
immunogenic epitope and vaccine-induced PSII antibodies recognize PSII on C. 
difficile outer surface.

DOI: 10.1586/erv.13.9
PMID: 23560922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Toxins (Basel). 2019 Feb 6;11(2):98. doi: 10.3390/toxins11020098.

Treatment and Prevention of Recurrent Clostridium difficile Infection with 
Functionalized Bovine Antibody-Enriched Whey in a Hamster Primary Infection 
Model.

Heidebrecht HJ(1)(2), Weiss WJ(3), Pulse M(4), Lange A(5), Gisch K(6), Kliem 
H(7), Mann S(8), Pfaffl MW(9)(10), Kulozik U(11)(12), von Eichel-Streiber C(13).

Author information:
(1)Chair of Food and Bioprocess Engineering, Technical University of Munich, 
85354 Freising, Germany. Hans-Juergen.Heidebrecht@tum.de.
(2)ZIEL Institute for Food & Health, Technical University of Munich, 85354 
Freising, Germany. Hans-Juergen.Heidebrecht@tum.de.
(3)University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107-2699, 
USA. William.Weiss@unthsc.edu.
(4)University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, TX 76107-2699, 
USA. Mark.Pulse@unthsc.edu.
(5)tgcBIOMICS GmbH, 55411 Bingen, Germany. a.lange@tgcbiomics.de.
(6)tgcBIOMICS GmbH, 55411 Bingen, Germany. k.gisch@tgcbiomics.de.
(7)Chair of Animal Physiology and Immunology, Technical University of Munich, 
85354 Freising, Germany. kliem@wzw.tum.de.
(8)Biosys UK Limited, London, SW1H, 9BP, UK. sacha.mann@gmail.com.
(9)Chair of Animal Physiology and Immunology, Technical University of Munich, 
85354 Freising, Germany. michael.pfaffl@wzw.tum.de.
(10)School of Life Science, Technical University of Munich, 85354 Freising, 
Germany. michael.pfaffl@wzw.tum.de.
(11)Chair of Food and Bioprocess Engineering, Technical University of Munich, 
85354 Freising, Germany. ulrich.kulozik@tum.de.
(12)ZIEL Institute for Food & Health, Technical University of Munich, 85354 
Freising, Germany. ulrich.kulozik@tum.de.
(13)tgcBIOMICS GmbH, 55411 Bingen, Germany. chv.eichel@tgcbiomics.de.

Toxin-induced Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major disease 
characterized by severe diarrhea and high morbidity rates. The aim with this 
study was to develop an alternative drug for the treatment of CDI. Cows were 
repeatedly immunized to establish specific immunoglobulin G and A titers against 
toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB) and against C. difficile cells in mature milk or 
colostrum. The effect of three different concentrations of anti-C. difficile 
whey protein isolates (anti-CD-WPI) and the standard of care antibiotic 
vancomycin were investigated in an animal model of CD infected hamsters (6 
groups, with 10 hamsters each). WPI obtained from the milk of exactly the same 
cows pre-immunization and a vehicle group served as negative controls. The 
survival of hamsters receiving anti-CD-WPI was 50, 80 and 100% compared to 10 
and 0% for the control groups, respectively. Vancomycin suppressed the growth of 
C. difficile and thus protected the hamsters at the time of administration, but 
90% of these hamsters nevertheless died shortly after discontinuation of 
treatment. In contrast, the surviving hamsters of the anti-CD-WPI groups 
survived the entire study period, although they were treated for only 75 h. The 
specific antibodies not only inactivated the toxins for initial suppression of 
CDI, but also provoked the inhibition of C. difficile growth after 
discontinuation, thus preventing recurrence. Oral administration of anti-CD-WPI 
is a functional therapy of CDI in infected hamsters for both primary treatment 
and prevention of recurrence. Thus, anti-CD-WPI could address the urgent unmet 
medical need for treating and preventing recurrent CDI in humans.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins11020098
PMCID: PMC6409564
PMID: 30736358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.V.E.-S. has received research grants from 
Biosys UK Limited. S.M. has served as an employee for Biosys UK Limited received 
personal fees during and outside the study. H.-J.H., W.J.W., M.P., A.L., K.G., 
H.K., M.W.P., U.K. report no conflict of interests.


23. J Vet Intern Med. 2020 Nov;34(6):2345-2356. doi: 10.1111/jvim.15928. Epub 2020 
Oct 13.

Developmental stages in microbiota, bile acids, and clostridial species in 
healthy puppies.

Blake AB(1), Cigarroa A(1), Klein HL(1), Khattab MR(1), Keating T(2), Van De 
Coevering P(2), Lidbury JA(1), Steiner JM(1), Suchodolski JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Laboratory - Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, 
USA.
(2)Guide Dogs for the Blind, San Rafael, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The fecal microbiota, fecal bile acid concentrations, and abundance 
of Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium difficile are altered in acute and 
chronic gastrointestinal disease in adult dogs. However, less is known in young 
puppies.
HYPOTHESIS/OBJECTIVES: To determine composition of the fecal microbiota, assess 
development of fecal bile acid profiles, and determine the abundance of 
Clostridial species in puppies, young adult dogs, and adult dogs.
ANIMALS: Healthy puppies from a whelping kennel (n = 53) and healthy 
client-owned dogs <1 year old (n = 20) were separated into 6 age groups, then 
compared to client-owned dogs over 1 year of age (n = 13).
METHODS: Prospective observational study. Naturally voided fecal samples were 
analyzed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction to measure bacterial 
abundances. Fecal bile acids were quantified using gas chromatography-mass 
spectrometry.
RESULTS: Puppies up to 5 to 6 weeks of age had increased Dysbiosis Index (median 
[min-max]: 5.39 [1.32-8.6], P < .001), increased abundance of C. difficile (4.1 
[0.01-4.85] log DNA, P < .001), decreased secondary bile acid concentrations 
(0.61 [0.28-5.06] μg/mg, P = .006), and decreased abundance of C. hiranonis 
(0.84 [0.01-6.71], P = .005) compared to adult dogs (-4.62 [-8.36 to -0.61], 
0.01 [0.01-0.01], 4.12 [0.32-8.94], and 6.02 [5.06-7.00], respectively). 
Secondary bile acid concentration positively correlated with C. hiranonis 
abundance (ρ = 0.77; P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: The increase in secondary bile acids and 
simultaneous decrease of C. difficile and C. perfringens after 5 to 6 weeks of 
age warrants further investigation into regulatory impacts that secondary bile 
acids could have on clostridial species in dogs.

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jvim.15928
PMCID: PMC7694855
PMID: 33047396

Conflict of interest statement: The following authors are either currently or 
within the last 3 years employed by the Gastrointestinal Laboratory at Texas A&M 
University that performs diagnostic testing on a fee‐for‐service basis: Amanda 
B. Blake, Annalis Cigarroa, Hannah L. Klein, Mohammad R. Khattab, Jonathan A. 
Lidbury, Joerg M. Steiner, and Jan S. Suchodolski.


24. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Mar 12;14(3):e1006940. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006940. 
eCollection 2018 Mar.

Pleiotropic roles of Clostridium difficile sin locus.

Girinathan BP(1), Ou J(2), Dupuy B(3)(4), Govind R(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, United Sates of 
America.
(2)Department of Agronomy, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, United Sates 
of America.
(3)Laboratoire Pathogénese des Bactéries Anaérobies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.
(4)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.

Clostridium difficile is the primary cause of nosocomial diarrhea and 
pseudomembranous colitis. It produces dormant spores, which serve as an 
infectious vehicle responsible for transmission of the disease and persistence 
of the organism in the environment. In Bacillus subtilis, the sin locus coding 
SinR (113 aa) and SinI (57 aa) is responsible for sporulation inhibition. In B. 
subtilis, SinR mainly acts as a repressor of its target genes to control 
sporulation, biofilm formation, and autolysis. SinI is an inhibitor of SinR, so 
their interaction determines whether SinR can inhibit its target gene 
expression. The C. difficile genome carries two sinR homologs in the operon that 
we named sinR and sinR', coding for SinR (112 aa) and SinR' (105 aa), 
respectively. In this study, we constructed and characterized sin locus mutants 
in two different C. difficile strains R20291 and JIR8094, to decipher the 
locus's role in C. difficile physiology. Transcriptome analysis of the sinRR' 
mutants revealed their pleiotropic roles in controlling several pathways 
including sporulation, toxin production, and motility in C. difficile. Through 
various genetic and biochemical experiments, we have shown that SinR can 
regulate transcription of key regulators in these pathways, which includes sigD, 
spo0A, and codY. We have found that SinR' acts as an antagonist to SinR by 
blocking its repressor activity. Using a hamster model, we have also 
demonstrated that the sin locus is needed for successful C. difficile infection. 
This study reveals the sin locus as a central link that connects the gene 
regulatory networks of sporulation, toxin production, and motility; three key 
pathways that are important for C. difficile pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006940
PMCID: PMC5864091
PMID: 29529083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this manuscript declared that 
they have no competing interests exist.


25. PLoS One. 2018 Feb 23;13(2):e0193411. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193411. 
eCollection 2018.

The zoonotic potential of Clostridium difficile from small companion animals and 
their owners.

Rabold D(1), Espelage W(2), Abu Sin M(2), Eckmanns T(2), Schneeberg A(3), 
Neubauer H(3), Möbius N(4), Hille K(4), Wieler LH(1)(2), Seyboldt C(3), 
Lübke-Becker A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Microbiology and Epizootics, Department of Veterinary Medicine, 
Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Institute of Bacterial Infections and Zoonoses, Federal Research Institute 
for Animal Health (Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut), Jena, Germany.
(4)Department of Biometry, Epidemiology and Information Processing, University 
of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Foundation, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) in humans range from 
asymptomatic carriage to life-threatening intestinal disease. Findings on C. 
difficile in various animal species and an overlap in ribotypes (RTs) suggest 
potential zoonotic transmission. However, the impact of animals for human CDI 
remains unclear.
METHODS: In a large-scale survey we collected 1,447 fecal samples to determine 
the occurrence of C. difficile in small companion animals (dogs and cats) and 
their owners and to assess potential epidemiological links within the community. 
The Germany-wide survey was conducted from July 2012-August 2013. PCR 
ribotyping, Multilocus VNTR Analysis (MLVA) and PCR detection of toxin genes 
were used to characterize isolated C. difficile strains. A database was defined 
and logistic regression used to identify putative factors associated with fecal 
shedding of C. difficile.
RESULTS: In total, 1,418 samples met the inclusion criteria. The isolation rates 
for small companion animals and their owners within the community were similarly 
low with 3.0% (25/840) and 2.9% (17/578), respectively. PCR ribotyping revealed 
eight and twelve different RTs in animals and humans, respectively, whereas 
three RTs were isolated in both, humans and animals. RT 014/0, a well-known 
human hospital-associated lineage, was predominantly detected in animal samples. 
Moreover, the potentially highly pathogenic RTs 027 and 078 were isolated from 
dogs. Even though, C. difficile did not occur simultaneously in animals and 
humans sharing the same household. The results of the epidemiological analysis 
of factors associated with fecal shedding of C. difficile support the hypothesis 
of a zoonotic potential.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular characterization and epidemiological analysis revealed 
that the zoonotic risk for C. difficile associated with dogs and cats within the 
community is low but cannot be excluded.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0193411
PMCID: PMC5825086
PMID: 29474439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


26. ACS Chem Biol. 2020 Apr 17;15(4):1050-1058. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.0c00066. 
Epub 2020 Apr 1.

Development and Characterization of Mouse Monoclonal Antibodies Specific for 
Clostridiodes (Clostridium) difficile Lipoteichoic Acid.

Cairns CM(1), van Faassen H(1), St Michael F(1), Aubry A(1), Henry KA(1), 
Rossotti MA(1), Logan SM(1), Hussack G(1), Gisch N(2), Hogendorf WFJ(3), 
Pedersen CM(3), Cox AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine and Emerging Infections Research, Human Health Therapeutics Research 
Centre, National Research Council, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0R6, Canada.
(2)Division of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Priority Research Area Infections, 
Research Center Borstel, Leibniz Lung Center, 23845 Borstel, Germany.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Clostridiodes (Clostridium) difficile is an anaerobic Gram-positive, 
spore-forming nosocomial, gastrointestinal pathogen causing C. 
difficile-associated disease with symptoms ranging from mild cases of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea to fatal pseudomembranous colitis. We developed 
murine monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) specific for a conserved cell surface 
antigen, lipoteichoic acid (LTA)of C. difficile. The mAbs were characterized in 
terms of their thermal stability, solubility, and their binding to LTA by 
surface plasmon resonance and competitive ELISA. Synthetic LTA molecules were 
prepared in order to better define the minimum epitope required to mimic the 
natural antigen, and three repeat units of the polymer were required for optimal 
recognition. One of the murine mAbs was chimerized with human constant region 
domains and was found to recognize the target antigen identically to the mouse 
version. These mAbs may be useful as therapeutics (standalone, in conjunction 
with known antitoxin approaches, or as delivery vehicles for antibody drug 
conjugates targeting the bacterium), as diagnostic agents, and in infection 
control applications.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.0c00066
PMID: 32191024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Equine Vet Sci. 2020 May;88:102951. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2020.102951. Epub 2020 
Feb 1.

Nasogastric Intubation as Health and Safety Risk in Equine Practice-A 
Questionnaire.

Drozdzewska K(1), Potocnik E(2), Schwarz B(3).

Author information:
(1)Freie Universität Berlin, Equine Clinic, Surgery and Radiology, Berlin, 
Germany. Electronic address: karolina.drozdzewska89@gmail.com.
(2)Tierklinik Maischeiderland, Großmaischeid, Germany.
(3)Pferdeinternist - Dr. Bianca Schwarz, DipECEIM, Saarlouis, Germany.

Placing a nasogastric tube can be a life-saving act for a horse but is 
considered an occupational hazard for veterinarians. An online questionnaire was 
performed to assess and specify potential risks. 123 equine veterinarians 
completed the survey, and the majority admitted using the mouth to handle the 
end of the nasogastric tube (sucking or blowing air) and having accidentally 
swallowed or aspirated stomach content or medications. This can potentially lead 
to aspiration pneumonia or pneumonitis. Mineral oil seems to be especially 
dangerous as aspiration may be asymptomatic at the beginning and lipoid 
pneumonitis may develop. Furthermore, 60% of responders would also handle the 
tube with their mouth if the horse was presented with fever and diarrhea or 
reflux formation, which might be affected by Salmonella sp. or Clostridium 
difficile producing toxins. The fact that nasogastric tubes are rarely being 
disinfected increases the risk of infection. 50% of veterinarians would use 
their mouth to suck or blow air into the tube during nasogastric intubation, 
even if the patient was presented with suspected poisoning. Rodenticide zinc 
phosphide is particularly dangerous as its breakdown product is a highly toxic 
gas. Inhalation leads to serious symptoms in humans, including pulmonary edema 
and neurological signs. Alternatives to mouth use (lavage, big syringe, or 
suction pump) when passing a tube should be considered, especially if a patient 
is presented with duodenitis-proximal jejunitis, diarrhea, or suspected 
poisoning. Awareness needs to be raised among veterinarians that nasogastric 
intubation is an extremely hazardous occupational practice.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2020.102951
PMID: 32303319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Acta Vet Scand. 2013 Mar 12;55(1):23. doi: 10.1186/1751-0147-55-23.

Clostridium difficile in faeces from healthy dogs and dogs with diarrhea.

Wetterwik KJ(1), Trowald-Wigh G, Fernström LL, Krovacek K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Division of 
Bacteriology and Food Safety, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, P,O, 
Box 7028, Uppsala, SE-750 07, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: This study was conducted to evaluate the faecal occurrence and 
characterization of Clostridium difficile in clinically healthy dogs (N = 50) 
and in dogs with diarrhea (N = 20) in the Stockholm-Uppsala region of Sweden.
FINDINGS: Clostridium difficile was isolated from 2/50 healthy dogs and from 
2/20 diarrheic dogs. Isolates from healthy dogs were negative for toxin A and B 
and for the tcdA and tcdB genes. Both isolates from diarrheic dogs were positive 
for toxin B and for the tcdA and tcdB genes. The C. difficile isolates from 
healthy dogs had PCR ribotype 009 (SE-type 6) and 010 (SE-type 3) whereas both 
isolates from dogs with diarrhoea had the toxigenic ribotype 014 (SE-type 21). 
One of the isolates from healthy dogs was initially resistant to metronidazole.
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed presence of toxigenic C. difficile in faecal 
samples of diarrheic dogs and low number of non- toxigenic isolates in healthy 
dogs from Uppsala-Stockholm region in Sweden. However, more comprehensive 
studies are warranted to investigate the role of C. difficile in 
gastrointestinal disease in dogs.

DOI: 10.1186/1751-0147-55-23
PMCID: PMC3606456
PMID: 23497714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Anaerobe. 2018 Jun;51:42-46. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.03.012. Epub 2018 Mar 
28.

High prevalence of Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 in pigs in Korea.

Kim HY(1), Cho A(2), Kim JW(2), Kim H(3), Kim B(4).

Author information:
(1)Animal Disease Diagnostic Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, 
Gimcheon 39660, Republic of Korea; Laboratory of Pathology, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Chonbuk National University, Iksan 54596, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Animal Disease Diagnostic Division, Animal and Plant Quarantine Agency, 
Gimcheon 39660, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Research Institute of Bacterial 
Resistance, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)Laboratory of Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonbuk National 
University, Iksan 54596, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
bskims@jbnu.ac.kr.

Clostridium difficile can cause neonatal enteritis, but has been isolated from 
both diseased and healthy pigs. C. difficile shedding by pigs is a potential 
source of zoonotic transmission to humans. The objectives of this study were to 
characterize the prevalence and genotype of C. difficile with respect to age and 
health status in the pig industry for the first time in Korea. Fecal samples of 
910 pigs were analyzed for the presence of C. difficile. In total, 176 (19.3%) 
C. difficile strains were isolated. The prevalence was significantly higher 
(p < 0.01) in diarrheic samples (30.4%) than in non-diarrheic samples (13.3%). 
The prevalence was highest in diarrheic suckling piglets (53.6%), followed by 
diarrheic sows (40.0%) and non-diarrheic suckling piglets (34.0%). The toxin 
genes tcdA, tcdB, cdtA, and cdtB were all detected in 153 isolates (A+B+CDT+, 
86.9%). Furthermore, the majority of toxigenic strains (86.5%) were identified 
as PCR ribotype 078, which is an important pathogen in both pigs and humans. 
These results indicated that C. difficile is a leading causative pathogen of 
neonatal diarrhea in piglets in Korea.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.03.012
PMID: 29604338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Gut Microbes. 2018;9(5):469-476. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2018.1448354. Epub 2018 
Sep 25.

The role of zinc and nutritional immunity in Clostridium difficile infection.

Zackular JP(1), Skaar EP(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Pathology , Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine , Nashville , Tennessee , United States.

Clostridium difficile in one of the most commonly reported nosocomial pathogens 
worldwide. Beyond antibiotic use, little is known about the host, microbiota, 
and environmental factors that contribute to susceptibility to and severity of 
C. difficile infection (CDI). We recently observed that in a mouse model of CDI, 
excess dietary zinc (Zn) alters the gut microbiota and decreases resistance to 
CDI. Moreover, we determined that high levels of Zn exacerbate C. 
difficile-associated disease and calprotectin-mediated Zn limitation is an 
essential host response to infection. In this addendum, we discuss how these 
findings add to our understanding of CDI and consider the potential implications 
of excess metal intake on the microbiota and infection.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2018.1448354
PMCID: PMC6219639
PMID: 29533126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Ind Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Mar;43(2-3):195-204. doi: 
10.1007/s10295-015-1714-6. Epub 2015 Dec 15.

Discovery and development of surotomycin for the treatment of Clostridium 
difficile.

Knight-Connoni V(1), Mascio C(1), Chesnel L(2)(3)(4), Silverman J(1).

Author information:
(1)Cubist Pharmaceuticals, Lexington, MA, USA.
(2)Cubist Pharmaceuticals, Lexington, MA, USA. laurent.chesnel@merck.com.
(3)Merck & Co., Inc., Lexington, MA, USA. laurent.chesnel@merck.com.
(4)Clinical Microbiology, Merck Research Labs, 65 Hayden Avenue, Lexington, MA, 
02421, USA. laurent.chesnel@merck.com.

The primary challenge for treating Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) is 
maintenance of clinical response after the end of treatment (sustained clinical 
response). Disease recurrence following a positive clinical response occurs in 
approximately 6-25 % of patients after the first episode and in up to 65 % for 
subsequent recurrences. Surotomycin, a novel cyclic lipopeptide antibiotic with 
a core derived by Streptomyces roseosporus fermentation, disrupts C. difficile 
cellular membrane activity in both logarithmic and stationary phases and 
minimally disturbs normal gastrointestinal microbiota because of its lack of 
activity against Gram-negative anaerobes and facultative anaerobes. Preclinical 
and clinical evidence indicate that surotomycin has low oral bioavailability, 
allowing gastrointestinal tract concentrations to greatly exceed its minimum 
inhibitory concentration for C. difficile. Surotomycin is well tolerated and 
effective in hamster models of CDI. Phase 2 clinical evidence suggests that 
surotomycin (250 mg twice daily) is an effective CDI treatment, with 
statistically lower recurrence rates than vancomycin.

DOI: 10.1007/s10295-015-1714-6
PMID: 26670919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2019 Aug 6;9:271. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00271. 
eCollection 2019.

Successional Dynamics in the Gut Microbiome Determine the Success of Clostridium 
difficile Infection in Adult Pig Models.

Jurburg SD(1)(2), Cornelissen JJBWJ(1), de Boer P(3), Smits MA(1), Rebel 
JMJ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Lelystad, Netherlands.
(2)iDiv - German Centre for Integrative Biodiversity Research, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)TNO Innovation for Life, Zeist, Netherlands.
(4)Wageningen Livestock Research, Wageningen, Netherlands.

Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) are a major cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea. It is hypothesized that CDI develops due to the 
antibiotic-induced disruption of the intestinal microbial community structure, 
which allows C. difficile to flourish. Here, we pre-treated weaned pigs with the 
antibiotics Clindamycin or Ciprofloxacin for 1 day, and subsequently inoculated 
them with a human and pig enteropathogenic C. difficile strain 078 spores. Body 
temperature, clinical signs of disease, and the fecal microbiome were monitored 
daily for 15 days. Clindamycin had a stronger effect on the pigs than 
Ciprofloxacin, resulting in drastic shifts in the fecal microbiome, decreases in 
microbial diversity and significant increases in body temperature, even in the 
absence of C. difficile. Fecal shedding of C. difficile was detectable for 3 and 
9 days in Ciprofloxacin and Clindamycin treated pigs inoculated with C. 
difficile, respectively, and in both cases decreased cell proliferation rates 
were detected in colon tissue. The timing of C. difficile shedding coincided 
with the decrease in a large cluster of Firmicutes following Clindamycin 
treatment, a pattern which was also independent of C. difficile inoculation. The 
observed community patterns suggest that successional dynamics following 
antibiotic treatment facilitate C. difficile establishment. The similarities 
between the microbiome responses observed in our study and those previously 
reported in CDI-infected humans further support the utility of adult pigs as 
models for the study of CDI.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00271
PMCID: PMC6691177
PMID: 31448240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Future Microbiol. 2018 Sep;13(11):1271-1281. doi: 10.2217/fmb-2017-0311. Epub 
2018 Sep 21.

Indomethacin increases severity of Clostridium difficile infection in mouse 
model.

Muñoz-Miralles J(1)(2), Trindade BC(3), Castro-Córdova P(1)(2), Bergin IL(4), 
Kirk LA(4), Gil F(1)(2), Aronoff DM(5), Paredes-Sabja D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Millennium Nucleus in the Biology of Intestinal Microbiota, Facultad de 
Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, 8370186 Santiago, Chile.
(2)Microbiota-Host Interactions & Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, 
8370186 Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Pathology, The University of Massachusetts Medical School, 
Worcester, 01605 MA, USA.
(4)The Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, The University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, 48109 MI, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, 37232 TN, USA.

AIM: To evaluate the effect on the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug 
indomethacin on Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) severity.
MATERIALS & METHODS: Indomethacin was administered in two different mouse models 
of antibiotic-associated CDI in two different facilities, using a low and high 
dose of indomethacin.
RESULTS: Indomethacin administration caused weight loss, increased the signs of 
severe infection and worsened histopathological damage, leading to 100% 
mortality during CDI. Indomethacin-treated, antibiotic-exposed mice infected 
with C. difficile had enhanced intestinal inflammation with increased expression 
of KC, IL-1β and IL-22 compared with infected mice unexposed to indomethacin.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate a negative impact of nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs on antibiotic-associated CDI in mice and suggest that 
targeting the synthesis or signaling of prostaglandins might be an approach to 
ameliorating the severity of CDI.

DOI: 10.2217/fmb-2017-0311
PMCID: PMC6190216
PMID: 30238771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial & competing interests disclosure This 
work was supported by Fondo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología de Chile (FONDECYT 
grant 1151025), from the and by a grant from Fondo de Fomento al Desarrollo 
Científico y Tecnológico (FONDEF) ID16|10038 to D Paredes-Sabja and by a 
doctoral fellowship to P Castro-Córdova (CONICYT 21161395). DM Aronoff and his 
team were funded by the NIH grants TR001723, AI121796 and the Vanderbilt 
Digestive Diseases Research Center NIH grant DK058404. BC Trindade was funded by 
a grant from the CAPES (grant number BEX 9179/11-9). The authors have no other 
relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity 
with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or 
materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed. No writing 
assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.


34. mSphere. 2018 Mar 28;3(2):e00089-18. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00089-18. eCollection 
2018 Mar-Apr.

Shifts in the Gut Metabolome and Clostridium difficile Transcriptome throughout 
Colonization and Infection in a Mouse Model.

Fletcher JR(1), Erwin S(1), Lanzas C(1), Theriot CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.

Antibiotics alter the gut microbiota and decrease resistance to Clostridium 
difficile colonization; however, the mechanisms driving colonization resistance 
are not well understood. Loss of resistance to C. difficile colonization due to 
antibiotic treatment is associated with alterations in the gut metabolome, 
specifically, with increases in levels of nutrients that C. difficile can 
utilize for growth in vitro. To define the nutrients that C. difficile requires 
for colonization and pathogenesis in vivo, we used a combination of mass 
spectrometry and RNA sequencing (RNA Seq) to model the gut metabolome and 
C. difficile transcriptome throughout an acute infection in a mouse model at the 
following time points: 0, 12, 24, and 30 h. We also performed multivariate-based 
integration of the omics data to define the signatures that were most important 
throughout colonization and infection. Here we show that amino acids, in 
particular, proline and branched-chain amino acids, and carbohydrates decrease 
in abundance over time in the mouse cecum and that C. difficile gene expression 
is consistent with their utilization in vivo. This was also reinforced by the 
multivariate-based integration of the omics data where we were able to 
discriminate the metabolites and transcripts that support C. difficile 
physiology between the different time points throughout colonization and 
infection. This report illustrates how important the availability of amino acids 
and other nutrients is for the initial stages of C. difficile colonization and 
progression of disease. Future studies identifying the source of the nutrients 
and engineering bacteria capable of outcompeting C. difficile in the gut will be 
important for developing new targeted bacterial therapeutics. IMPORTANCE 
Clostridium difficile is a bacterial pathogen of global significance that is a 
major cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Antibiotics deplete the 
indigenous gut microbiota and change the metabolic environment in the gut to one 
favoring C. difficile growth. Here we used metabolomics and transcriptomics to 
define the gut environment after antibiotics and during the initial stages of 
C. difficile colonization and infection. We show that amino acids, in 
particular, proline and branched-chain amino acids, and carbohydrates decrease 
in abundance over time and that C. difficile gene expression is consistent with 
their utilization by the bacterium in vivo. We employed an integrated approach 
to analyze the metabolome and transcriptome to identify associations between 
metabolites and transcripts. This highlighted the importance of key nutrients in 
the early stages of colonization, and the data provide a rationale for the 
development of therapies based on the use of bacteria that specifically compete 
for nutrients that are essential for C. difficile colonization and disease.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00089-18
PMCID: PMC5874438
PMID: 29600278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Bioorg Med Chem Lett. 2018 Dec 15;28(23-24):3601-3605. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2018.10.047. Epub 2018 Oct 29.

Synthesis and SAR studies of novel benzodiazepinedione-based inhibitors of 
Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) toxin B (TcdB).

Letourneau JJ(1), Stroke IL(2), Hilbert DW(3), Cole AG(2), Sturzenbecker LJ(2), 
Marinelli BA(2), Quintero JG(2), Sabalski J(2), Li Y(2), Ma L(2), Pechik I(2), 
Stein PD(2), Webb ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Venenum Biodesign, a member of Genesis Biotechnology Group, 8 Black Forest 
Road, Hamilton, NJ 08691, USA. Electronic address: 
jletourneau@venenumbiodesign.com.
(2)Venenum Biodesign, a member of Genesis Biotechnology Group, 8 Black Forest 
Road, Hamilton, NJ 08691, USA.
(3)Femeris Women's Health Research Center, a member of Genesis Biotechnology 
Group, 2000 Waterview Drive, Hamilton, NJ 08691, USA.

Synthesis and structure-activity relationships (SAR) of a novel series of 
benzodiazepinedione-based inhibitors of Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB) are 
described. Compounds demonstrating low nanomolar affinity for TcdB, and which 
possess improved stability in mouse plasma vs. earlier compounds from this 
series, have been identified. Optimized compound 11d demonstrates a good 
pharmacokinetic (PK) profile in mouse and hamster and is efficacious in a 
hamster survival model of Clostridium difficile infection.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2018.10.047
PMID: 30392779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2018 Jul 1;315(1):G43-G52. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00307.2017. Epub 2018 Mar 29.

Clostridium difficile toxins A and B decrease intestinal SLC26A3 protein 
expression.

Coffing H(1), Priyamvada S(1), Anbazhagan AN(1), Salibay C(2), Engevik M(3), 
Versalovic J(3), Yacyshyn MB(4), Yacyshyn B(4), Tyagi S(1), Saksena S(1)(5), 
Gill RK(1), Alrefai WA(1)(5), Dudeja PK(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Illinois at Chicago , Chicago, 
Illinois.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine and 
Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital , Houston, Texas.
(4)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department. of Medicine, University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine , Cincinnati, Ohio.
(5)Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Chicago, Illinois.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the primary cause of nosocomial 
diarrhea in the United States. Although C. difficile toxins A and B are the 
primary mediators of CDI, the overall pathophysiology underlying C. 
difficile-associated diarrhea remains poorly understood. Studies have shown that 
a decrease in both NHE3 (Na+/H+ exchanger) and DRA (downregulated in adenoma, 
Cl-/[Formula: see text] exchanger), resulting in decreased electrolyte 
absorption, is implicated in infectious and inflammatory diarrhea. Furthermore, 
studies have shown that NHE3 is depleted at the apical surface of intestinal 
epithelial cells and downregulated in patients with CDI, but the role of DRA in 
CDI remains unknown. In the current studies, we examined the effects of C. 
difficile toxins TcdA and TcdB on DRA protein and mRNA levels in intestinal 
epithelial cells (IECs). Our data demonstrated that DRA protein levels were 
significantly reduced in response to TcdA and TcdB in IECs in culture. This 
effect was also specific to DRA, as NHE3 and PAT-1 (putative anion transporter 
1) protein levels were unaffected by TcdA and TcdB. Additionally, purified TcdA 
and TcdA + TcdB, but not TcdB, resulted in a decrease in colonic DRA protein 
levels in a toxigenic mouse model of CDI. Finally, patients with recurrent CDI 
also exhibited significantly reduced expression of colonic DRA protein. 
Together, these findings indicate that C. difficile toxins markedly downregulate 
intestinal expression of DRA which may contribute to the diarrheal phenotype of 
CDI. NEW & NOTEWORTHY Our studies demonstrate, for the first time, that C. 
difficile toxins reduce DRA protein, but not mRNA, levels in intestinal 
epithelial cells. These findings suggest that a downregulation of DRA may be a 
critical factor in C. difficile infection-associated diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00307.2017
PMCID: PMC6109705
PMID: 29597352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Anaerobe. 2018 Feb;49:58-62. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.12.003. Epub 2017 Dec 
20.

The incidence of Clostridioides difficile and Clostridium perfringens 
netF-positive strains in diarrheic dogs.

Diniz AN(1), Coura FM(1), Rupnik M(2), Adams V(3), Stent TL(3), Rood JI(3), de 
Oliveira CA Jr(1), Lobato FCF(1), Silva ROS(4).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Antônio 
Carlos Avenue, 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, 31.270-901, Brazil.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Maribor, Slovenia; National Laboratory for 
Health, Environment and Food, Maribor, Slovenia.
(3)Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Microbiology, Monash 
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Antônio 
Carlos Avenue, 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, 31.270-901, Brazil. Electronic address: 
rodrigo.otaviosilva@gmail.com.

The aim of this study was to examine the incidence of Clostridioides (previously 
Clostridium) difficile and Clostridium perfringens in the feces of diarrheic and 
non-diarrheic dogs. Also, the presence of other common canine enteropathogens 
was examined. Toxigenic C. difficile and C. perfringens positive for the 
NetF-encoding gene (netF) were detected in 11 (11.9%) and seven (7.6%) diarrheic 
dogs, respectively. Three dogs were diagnosed simultaneously with toxigenic 
C. difficile and netF-positive C. perfringens. Among other enteropathogens, 
Giardia sp. was the most common agent detected in dogs positive for toxigenic 
C. difficile or netF-positive C. perfringens. The results suggest that 
C. difficile and C. perfringens occur more frequently as a primary cause of 
diarrhea.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.12.003
PMCID: PMC7111177
PMID: 29274467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Front Microbiol. 2018 Jun 18;9:1264. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01264. eCollection 
2018.

Establishment of an Endogenous Clostridium difficile Rat Infection Model and 
Evaluation of the Effects of Clostridium butyricum MIYAIRI 588 Probiotic Strain.

Oka K(1), Osaki T(2), Hanawa T(2), Kurata S(2), Sugiyama E(3), Takahashi 
M(1)(2), Tanaka M(3), Taguchi H(4), Kamiya S(2).

Author information:
(1)Tokyo R&D Center, Miyarisan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyorin University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Research Laboratory, Miyarisan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Nagano, Japan.
(4)Department of Immunology, Kyorin University Faculty of Health Sciences, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Clostridium difficile is well known as an agent responsible for pseudomembranous 
colitis and antibiotic-associated diarrhea. The hamster model utilizing an oral 
route for infection of C. difficile has been considered to be the standard model 
for analysis of C. difficile infection (CDI) but this model exhibits differences 
to human CDI, most notably as most hamsters die without exhibiting diarrhea. 
Therefore, we attempted to develop a new non-lethal and diarrheal rat CDI model 
caused by endogenous C. difficile using metronidazole (MNZ) and egg white. In 
addition, the effects of probiotic strain Clostridium butyricum MIYAIRI 588 
(CBM) on CDI were examined using this model. Syrian Golden hamsters received 
clindamycin phosphate orally at 30 mg/kg on 5 days before challenge with either 
C. difficile VPI10463 (hypertoxigenic strain) or KY34 (low toxigenic clinical 
isolate). Mortality and the presence of diarrhea were observed twice a day for 
the duration of the experiment. Wistar rats received 10% egg white dissolved in 
drinking water for 1 week ad libitum following intramuscular administration of 
200 mg/kg MNZ twice a day for 3 days. Diarrhea score was determined for each day 
and fecal water content, biotin concentration, and cytotoxin titer in feces were 
examined. More than 70% of hamsters orally infected with C. difficile died 
without exhibiting diarrhea regardless of toxigenicity of strain. The rats 
receiving egg white after MNZ administration developed diarrhea due to 
overgrowth of endogenous C. difficile. This CDI model is non-lethal and 
diarrheal, and some rats in this model were spontaneously cured. The incidence 
of diarrhea was significantly decreased in C. butyricum treated rats. These 
results indicate that the CDI model using egg white and MNZ has potentially 
better similarity to human CDI, and implies that treatment with C. butyricum may 
reduce the risk of CDI.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01264
PMCID: PMC6015907
PMID: 29967595


39. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1403:397-408. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3387-7_21.

The Design of a Clostridium difficile Carbohydrate-Based Vaccine.

Monteiro MA(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, ON, Canada, N1G 2W1. 
monteiro@uoguelph.ca.

Clostridium difficile vaccines composed of surface polysaccharides (PSs) have 
the potential to simultaneously control infection and colonization levels in 
humans. Hot water-phenol treatment of C. difficile biomass can extricate 
water-soluble PS-I and PS-II; and water- and phenol-soluble PS-III. C. difficile 
vaccines based on PS-II have attracted the most attention due its facile 
purification and ubiquitous expression by C. difficile ribotypes. Anti PS-II 
antibodies recognize both C. difficile vegetative cell and sporulating 
preparations and confer protection against C. difficile infection in a mouse 
model. The design of such an efficacious C. difficile PS-II conjugate vaccine is 
described here.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3387-7_21
PMID: 27076143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. New Microbes New Infect. 2019 Aug 16;32:100590. doi: 10.1016/j.nmni.2019.100590. 
eCollection 2019 Nov.

Virulence of new variant strains of Clostridium difficile producing only toxin A 
or binary toxin in the hamster model.

Marvaud JC(1), Quevedo-Torres S(1)(2), Eckert C(2), Janoir C(1), Barbut F(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)EA 7359 'Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé' (UBaPS), Université Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(2)AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Antoine National Reference Laboratory for C. difficile, 
Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Pharmacie de Paris, UMR-S1139, 
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.

Pathogenesis of Clostridium difficile has been linked to production of toxins, 
including the large toxins A and B as well as the binary toxin CDT. Until 
recently, toxin A was only found in combination in clinical strains with the 
toxin B, unlike toxin B or CDT, which were found alone in toxigenic variants. 
New toxigenic variants of C. difficile detected in our laboratory from patients 
with diarrhoea or severe colitis, including a variant producing only toxin A, 
were tested for virulence in the hamster model, which displays the clinical 
features of C. difficile disease. Hamsters infected with a strain producing only 
toxin B induced similar clinical signs, time to death from infection and 
histologic damage compared to the hypervirulent strain 027. No mortality or 
clinical signs of infection but caecal histologic damage was found with the 
variant producing only toxin A. The C. difficile variant strain producing only 
CDT was able to kill one hamster out of seven; nevertheless, the surviving 
animals had few alteration of the caecum.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nmni.2019.100590
PMCID: PMC6734109
PMID: 31516714


41. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz. 2015 Dec;110(8):1062-5. doi: 10.1590/0074-02760150294. 
Epub 2015 Dec 11.

Clostridium difficile ribotypes in humans and animals in Brazil.

Silva RO(1), Rupnik M(2), Diniz AN(1), Vilela EG(3), Lobato FC(1).

Author information:
(1)Escola de Veterinária, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 
MG, Brasil.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.
(3)Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 
MG, Brasil.

Clostridium difficile is an emerging enteropathogen responsible for 
pseudomembranous colitis in humans and diarrhoea in several domestic and wild 
animal species. Despite its known importance, there are few studies about C. 
difficile polymerase chain reaction (PCR) ribotypes in Brazil and the actual 
knowledge is restricted to studies on human isolates. The aim of the study was 
therefore to compare C. difficile ribotypes isolated from humans and animals in 
Brazil. Seventy-six C. difficile strains isolated from humans (n = 25), dogs (n 
= 23), piglets (n = 12), foals (n = 7), calves (n = 7), one cat, and one manned 
wolf were distributed into 24 different PCR ribotypes. Among toxigenic strains, 
PCR ribotypes 014/020 and 106 were the most common, accounting for 14 (18.4%) 
and eight (10.5%) samples, respectively. Fourteen different PCR ribotypes were 
detected among human isolates, nine of them have also been identified in at 
least one animal species. PCR ribotype 027 was not detected, whereas 078 were 
found only in foals. This data suggests a high diversity of PCR ribotypes in 
humans and animals in Brazil and support the discussion of C. difficile as a 
zoonotic pathogen.

DOI: 10.1590/0074-02760150294
PMCID: PMC4708028
PMID: 26676318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Vet Ital. 2016 Jan-Mar;52(1):21-9. doi: 10.12834/VetIt.180.545.1.

Hygienic characteristics and microbiological hazard identification in horse and 
donkey raw milk.

Colavita G(1), Amadoro C, Rossi F, Fantuz F, Salimei E.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina e Scienze per la Salute, Università degli Studi del 
Molise, Via de Sanctis SNC, 86100 Campobasso, Italy.

Today the interest toward horse (Equus caballus) and donkey (Equus asinus) milk 
for human consumption is receiving a renewed attention because of its particular 
composition, hypoallergenicity, and nutraceutical properties. The realistic 
perspective of global use of this aliment in balanced diets, especially for 
infancy and geriatrics, poses the need for a more in depth knowledge on milk 
hygiene and on the health status of dairy animals, as a prerequisite of 
consumers' safety. The aim of this paper was to review the available literature 
on the health and hygiene parameters as well as on the potential microbiological 
hazards in horse and donkey milk and the risks related to their consumption. 
Both microbial contamination and somatic cell count are reasonably low in equine 
milk and also the presence of pathogens, like Escherichia coli O157, Salmonella 
spp., Campylobacter spp., Yersinia enterocolitica, Brucella spp., Mycobacterium 
spp., Bacillus cereus, Cronobacter sakazakii, Streptococcus equi subsp. 
zooepidemicus, Rhodococcus equi, Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis, 
Clostridium difficile and Burkholderia mallei is low. However, in those regions 
of the world where the prevalence of Brucella spp. and Rhodococcus equi is high, 
the alimentary risks could increase. Similarly, in areas with higher incidence 
of immunocompromised people, the increased risks should be warned not only for 
pathogens but also for opportunistic microbiota.

DOI: 10.12834/VetIt.180.545.1
PMID: 27033528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018 Feb 9;5(4):611-625. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2018.01.022. eCollection 2018.

Cysteine Protease-Mediated Autocleavage of Clostridium difficile Toxins 
Regulates Their Proinflammatory Activity.

Zhang Y(1), Li S(1), Yang Z(1), Shi L(1), Yu H(1), Salerno-Goncalves R(2), Saint 
Fleur A(1), Feng H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, School of Dentistry, University of 
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Center for Vaccine Development, School of 
Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridium difficile toxin A (TcdA) and C difficile toxin 
toxin B (TcdB), the major virulence factors of the bacterium, cause intestinal 
tissue damage and inflammation. Although the 2 toxins are homologous and share a 
similar domain structure, TcdA is generally more inflammatory whereas TcdB is 
more cytotoxic. The functional domain of the toxins that govern the 
proinflammatory activities of the 2 toxins is unknown.
METHODS: Here, we investigated toxin domain functions that regulate the 
proinflammatory activity of C difficile toxins. By using a mouse ilea loop 
model, human tissues, and immune cells, we examined the inflammatory responses 
to a series of chimeric toxins or toxin mutants deficient in specific domain 
functions.
RESULTS: Blocking autoprocessing of TcdB by mutagenesis or chemical inhibition, 
while reducing cytotoxicity of the toxin, significantly enhanced its 
proinflammatory activities in the animal model. Furthermore, a noncleavable 
mutant TcdB was significantly more potent than the wild-type toxin in the 
induction of proinflammatory cytokines in human colonic tissues and immune 
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we identified a novel mechanism of regulating the 
biological activities of C difficile toxins in that cysteine protease-mediated 
autoprocessing regulates toxins' proinflammatory activities. Our findings 
provide new insight into the pathogenesis of C difficile infection and the 
design of therapeutics against the disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2018.01.022
PMCID: PMC6009800
PMID: 29930981


44. Vaccine. 2018 Sep 25;36(40):6017-6021. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.08.013. Epub 
2018 Aug 29.

Protection against Clostridium difficile infection in a hamster model by oral 
vaccination using flagellin FliC-loaded pectin beads.

Bruxelle JF(1), Tsapis N(2), Hoys S(1), Collignon A(1), Janoir C(1), Fattal 
E(2), Péchiné S(3).

Author information:
(1)EA4043 Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Univ. Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(2)Institut Galien Paris-Sud, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 
Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(3)EA4043 Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Univ. Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France. Electronic address: 
severine.pechine@u-psud.fr.

Clostridium difficile flagellin FliC is a highly immunogenic pathogen-associated 
molecular pattern playing a key role in C. difficile pathogenesis and gut 
colonization. Here, we designed an oral vaccine against C. difficile with FliC 
encapsulated into pectin beads for colonic release. Bead stability and FliC 
retention was confirmed in vitro using simulated intestinal media (SIM), while 
bead degradation and FliC release was observed upon incubation in simulated 
colonic media (SCM). The importance of FliC encapsulation into pectin beads for 
protection against C. difficile was assessed in a vaccination assay using a 
lethal hamster model of C. difficile infection. Three groups of hamsters orally 
received either FliC-loaded beads or unloaded beads in gastro-resistant capsule 
to limit gastric degradation or free FliC. Two other groups were immunized with 
free FliC, one intra-rectally and the other intra-peritoneally. Hamsters were 
then challenged with a lethal dose of C. difficile VPI 10463. Fifty percent of 
hamsters orally immunized with FliC-loaded beads survived whereas all hamsters 
orally immunized with free FliC died within 7 days post challenge. No 
significant protection was observed in the other groups. Only intra-peritoneally 
immunized hamsters presented anti-FliC IgG antibodies in sera after 
immunizations. These results suggest that an oral immunization with FliC-loaded 
beads probably induced a mucosal immune response, therefore providing a 
protective effect. This study confirms the importance of FliC encapsulation into 
pectin beads for a protective oral vaccine against C. difficile.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.08.013
PMID: 30172633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Anaerobe. 2017 Feb;43:15-20. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.11.004. Epub 2016 Nov 
18.

Survival and prevalence of Clostridium difficile in manure compost derived from 
pigs.

Usui M(1), Kawakura M(1), Yoshizawa N(1), San LL(2), Nakajima C(2), Suzuki Y(2), 
Tamura Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Safety, Department of Health and 
Environmental Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen University, 
Ebetsu, Hokkaido, Japan.
(2)Division of Bioresources, Hokkaido University Research Center for Zoonosis 
Control, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Safety, Department of Health and 
Environmental Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen University, 
Ebetsu, Hokkaido, Japan. Electronic address: tamuray@rakuno.ac.jp.

Pigs, particularly piglets, have been identified as reservoir hosts of 
Clostridium difficile. To examine the survival ability of this pathogen in pig 
feces-based manure compost, C. difficile spores, which were prepared to contain 
as few vegetative cells as possible, were artificially inoculated into pig feces 
and incubated at different temperatures. While C. difficile survived in the 
feces incubated at temperatures below 37 °C for over 30 days, cell numbers 
gradually decreased at thermophilic temperatures (over 55 °C; p < 0.05). Next, 
to clarify the prevalence of C. difficile in field manure compost, we isolated 
and characterized C. difficile from the final products of manure compost 
products of 14 pig farms. A total of 11 C. difficile strains were isolated from 
5 of 14 (36% positive rate) samples tested. Of these 11 strains, 82% were 
toxigenic, with ribotype 078 being the most prevalent. Thus, the application of 
composted manure to land therefore poses a possible risk of C. difficile 
transfer to the food chain.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.11.004
PMID: 27871997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Anaerobe. 2020 Dec;66:102290. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102290. Epub 2020 Oct 
30.

Genomic basis of antimicrobial resistance in non-toxigenic Clostridium difficile 
in Southeast Asia.

Imwattana K(1), Kiratisin P(2), Riley TV(3), Knight DR(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Western 
Australia, Australia; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj 
Hospital, Mahidol University, Thailand.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Thailand.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Western 
Australia, Australia; Medical, Molecular and Forensic Sciences, Murdoch 
University, Western Australia, Australia; School of Medical and Health Sciences, 
Edith Cowan University, Western Australia, Australia; Department of 
Microbiology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine, Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre, 
Western Australia, Australia.
(4)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, Western 
Australia, Australia; Medical, Molecular and Forensic Sciences, Murdoch 
University, Western Australia, Australia. Electronic address: 
daniel.knight@murdoch.edu.au.

Despite being incapable of causing Clostridium difficile infection, 
non-toxigenic C. difficile (NTCD) may still be relevant. This study explored the 
role of NTCD as a reservoir of accessory antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genes in 
NTCD from Southeast Asia. This region has high rates of antimicrobial use, a 
high prevalence of NTCD and phenotypic AMR in such strains. More than half of 
the 28 NTCD strains investigated had at least one accessory AMR gene on mobile 
genetic elements (MGEs) which were similar to the elements found in other 
bacteria, including Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae and Streptococcus suis, both of 
which are found in the pig gut. Thus, C. difficile may facilitate the movement 
of AMR genes between different hosts within a wide range of pathogenic bacteria. 
C. difficile β-lactamases were not located on MGEs and were unlikely to be 
transferred. Concordance between the MLSB resistance genotype and phenotype was 
low, suggesting multiple resistance mechanisms, many of which remain unknown. On 
the contrary, there was a high concordance between resistance genotype and 
phenotype for both fluoroquinolones and rifaximin. From an epidemiological 
perspective, NTCD populations in Southeast Asia comprised members of 
evolutionary clades 1 and 4, which are thought to have originated from Europe 
and Asia, respectively. This population structure reflects the close 
relationship between the people of the two regions.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2020.102290
PMID: 33137436

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: TVR has received grants from 
Cepheid; Merck; Otsuka; Sanofi; Summit and Roche for work outside that in this 
report. Other authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.


47. J Food Prot. 2018 Apr;81(4):561-568. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-17-354.

Development and Validation of a New Protocol for Detecting and Recovering 
Clostridium difficile from Meat Samples.

Biasizzo M(1), Vadnjal S(1), Henigman U(1), Krizman M(1), Kirbis A(1), 
Jamnikar-Ciglenecki U(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Food Safety, Feed and Environment, Veterinary Faculty, 
University of Ljubljana, Gerbičeva 60, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

There is no recommended protocol for detecting and isolating Clostridium 
difficile present in food samples. Here, we have evaluated the recovery of C. 
difficile in meat samples after incubating them in various enrichment broths. 
The media were as follows: cycloserine-cefoxitin fructose broth supplemented 
with taurocholic acid, d-cycloserine, cefoxitin, and lysozyme; 
cycloserine-cefoxitin mannitol broth with taurocholate and lysozyme; and 
cycloserine-cefoxitin fructose broth supplemented with taurocholic acid, C. 
difficile moxalactam norfloxacin selective supplement, and lysozyme. Samples 
were inoculated with various strains and quantities of C. difficile and then 
enriched in the different broths for 1, 4, and 7 days. C. difficile was isolated 
on agar plates and detected with quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). The 
procedure using enrichment in cycloserine-cefoxitin fructose broth supplemented 
with taurocholic acid, d-cycloserine, cefoxitin, and lysozyme and incubation for 
4 days for qPCR detection and 7 days for isolation (plating on C. difficile agar 
base with added C. difficile selective supplement and 7% [v/v] defibrinated 
horse blood after alcoholic shock and centrifugation) was validated. Samples of 
different kinds of meat and meat preparation were contaminated and used for 
validation of the chosen protocol. The sensitivity of detection with qPCR was 
100%, and the sensitivity of the isolation method was 96%.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-17-354
PMID: 29517350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Gut Microbes. 2012 Mar-Apr;3(2):145-67. doi: 10.4161/gmic.19526. Epub 2012 Mar 
1.

Models for the study of Clostridium difficile infection.

Best EL(1), Freeman J, Wilcox MH.

Author information:
(1)Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, Microbiology Department, Old Medical 
School, Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds, UK. emma.best@leedsth.nhs.uk

Models of Clostridium difficile infection (C. difficile) have been used 
extensively for Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) research. The hamster model 
of C. difficile infection has been most extensively employed for the study of C. 
difficile and this has been used in many different areas of research, including 
the induction of C. difficile, the testing of new treatments, population 
dynamics and characterization of virulence. Investigations using in vitro models 
for C. difficile introduced the concept of colonization resistance, evaluated 
the role of antibiotics in C. difficile development, explored population 
dynamics and have been useful in the evaluation of C. difficile treatments. 
Experiments using models have major advantages over clinical studies and have 
been indispensible in furthering C. difficile research. It is important for 
future study programs to carefully consider the approach to use and therefore be 
better placed to inform the design and interpretation of clinical studies.

DOI: 10.4161/gmic.19526
PMCID: PMC3370947
PMID: 22555466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Infect Immun. 2019 Jul 23;87(8):e00005-19. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00005-19. Print 2019 
Aug.

The Ser/Thr Kinase PrkC Participates in Cell Wall Homeostasis and Antimicrobial 
Resistance in Clostridium difficile.

Cuenot E(1)(2), Garcia-Garcia T(1)(2), Douche T(3), Gorgette O(4), Courtin P(5), 
Denis-Quanquin S(6), Hoys S(7), Tremblay YDN(1)(2), Matondo M(3), 
Chapot-Chartier MP(5), Janoir C(7), Dupuy B(1)(2), Candela T(7), 
Martin-Verstraete I(8)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Pathogénese des Bactéries Anaérobies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.
(2)Université de Paris, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)Plateforme Protéomique, Unité de Technologie et Service Spectrométrie de 
Masse pour la Biologie, CNRS USR 2000, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(4)Unité Technologie et Service Biolmagerie Ultrastructurale, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.
(5)Micalis Institute, INRA, AgroParisTech, Université Paris-Saclay, 
Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(6)Université Lyon, Ens de Lyon, CNRS, Université Lyon 1, Laboratoire de Chimie 
UMR 5182, Lyon, France.
(7)EA 4043, Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Université Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(8)Laboratoire Pathogénese des Bactéries Anaérobies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France isabelle.martin-verstraete@pasteur.fr.

Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea in 
adults. During infection, C. difficile must detect the host environment and 
induce an appropriate survival strategy. Signal transduction networks involving 
serine/threonine kinases (STKs) play key roles in adaptation, as they regulate 
numerous physiological processes. PrkC of C. difficile is an STK with two PASTA 
domains. We showed that PrkC is membrane associated and is found at the septum. 
We observed that deletion of prkC affects cell morphology with an increase in 
mean size, cell length heterogeneity, and presence of abnormal septa. A ΔprkC 
mutant was able to sporulate and germinate but was less motile and formed more 
biofilm than the wild-type strain. Moreover, a ΔprkC mutant was more sensitive 
to antimicrobial compounds that target the cell envelope, such as the secondary 
bile salt deoxycholate, cephalosporins, cationic antimicrobial peptides, and 
lysozyme. This increased susceptibility was not associated with differences in 
peptidoglycan or polysaccharide II composition. However, the ΔprkC mutant had 
less peptidoglycan and released more polysaccharide II into the supernatant. A 
proteomic analysis showed that the majority of C. difficile proteins associated 
with the cell wall were less abundant in the ΔprkC mutant than the wild-type 
strain. Finally, in a hamster model of infection, the ΔprkC mutant had a 
colonization delay that did not significantly affect overall virulence.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00005-19
PMCID: PMC6652769
PMID: 31085703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Anaerobe. 2017 Dec;48:237-241. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.10.004. Epub 2017 
Oct 9.

PCR-ribotype distribution of Clostridium difficile in Irish pigs.

Stein K(1), Egan S(2), Lynch H(3), Harmanus C(4), Kyne L(5), Herra C(2), 
McDermott S(6), Kuijper E(4), Fitzpatrick F(7), FitzGerald S(8), Fenelon L(8), 
Drudy D(2).

Author information:
(1)University College Dublin, Ireland; St. Vincent's University Hospital, 
Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address: k.stein@svuh.ie.
(2)DIT Dublin Institute of Technology, Ireland.
(3)University College Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Leiden University Medical Centre, The Netherlands.
(5)University College Dublin, Ireland; Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(6)St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(7)Beaumont Hospital Dublin, Ireland; Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(8)University College Dublin, Ireland; St. Vincent's University Hospital, 
Dublin, Ireland.

Clostridium difficile is an important enteric pathogen in humans causing 
infections in the healthcare environment and the community. Carriage of 
C. difficile and C. difficile-related enterocolitis has been reported in piglets 
worldwide. The aim of this study was to investigate the rates of C. difficile 
isolation from pigs in Ireland. Faecal samples from piglet litters and sows were 
collected from six farms in 2015. The sows were non-diarrhoeal at the time of 
sampling. The diarrhoeal status of the piglets was unknown. C. difficile was 
isolated from 34/44 (77%) of piglet litter samples and from 33/156 (21%) of sow 
samples. The isolation rate in sows varied from 3 to 39% and in piglet litters 
from 72 to 86% depending on farm location. Toxin A and toxin B were present in 
99% (66/67) of isolates; and binary toxin in 85% (57/67). Only PCR-ribotypes 078 
(88%) and 193 (12%) were identified in piglets. Seven PCR-ribotypes were 
detected in sow C. difficile isolates: PCR-ribotypes 078 (67%), 050 (12%), 
014/020 (6%), 015 (6%), 029 (3%), 035 (3%) and 193 (3%). This study shows that 
toxigenic C. difficile strains such as PCR-ribotype 078 can be commonly isolated 
from pigs at different geographical locations in Ireland. Since PCR-ribotype 078 
is frequently found in humans in Ireland, this highlights the potential for 
interspecies transmission.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.10.004
PMID: 29024758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Anaerobe. 2015 Dec;36:9-13. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.09.006. Epub 2015 Sep 
21.

Isolation and characterization of Clostridium difficile from pet dogs in Assam, 
India.

Hussain I(1), Sharma RK(2), Borah P(3), Rajkhowa S(4), Hussain I(5), Barkalita 
LM(5), Hasin D(6), Choudhury M(5), Rupnik M(7), Deka NK(5), Saikia GK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science (CVSc), Assam 
Agricultural University (AAU), Khanapara, Guwahati 22, Assam, India. Electronic 
address: isfaqhussain@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science (CVSc), Assam 
Agricultural University (AAU), Khanapara, Guwahati 22, Assam, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science (CVSc), Assam 
Agricultural University (AAU), Khanapara, Guwahati 22, Assam, India; State 
Biotech Hub, CVSc, AAU, Khanapara, Guwahati 22, Assam, India.
(4)National Research Centre on Pig, ICAR, Rani, Guwahati 31, Assam, India.
(5)State Biotech Hub, CVSc, AAU, Khanapara, Guwahati 22, Assam, India.
(6)Department of Veterinary Physiology, CVSc, AAU, Khanapara, Guwahati 22, 
Assam, India.
(7)National Laboratory for Health, Environment and Food, Maribor, Slovenia; 
University of Maribor, Faculty of Medicine, Maribor, Slovenia; Centre of 
Excellence for Integrated Approaches in Chemistry and Biology of Proteins, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.

One hundred and seventeen faecal samples from pet dogs (pup = 21 and adult = 96) 
brought for treatment to a veterinary clinic were examined for Clostridium 
difficile. A total of 16 (13.67%) samples were positive. Nine (56.25%) isolates 
were obtained from 17 adult dogs undergoing antibiotic treatment and this was 
significantly higher (p < 0.01) as compared to isolates from dogs without 
antibiotic treatment. Ten isolates (62.5%) were toxigenic (all toxinotype 0) and 
six were non-toxigenic. None of the isolates were positive for binary toxin 
genes. PCR ribotyping revealed three different ribotypes (012, 014 and 046) 
among A(+)B(+) isolates and five different ribotypes (010, SLO 131, and ACD 001 
to ACD 003) among A(-)B(-) isolates. The PFGE analysis of toxigenic isolates 
revealed three different pulsotypes corresponding to the PCR ribotypes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.09.006
PMID: 26393292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Cell Rep Med. 2020 Apr 21;1(1):100005. doi: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100005.

The Clinical Drug Ebselen Attenuates Inflammation and Promotes Microbiome 
Recovery in Mice after Antibiotic Treatment for CDI.

Garland M(1)(2), Hryckowian AJ(3), Tholen M(2), Bender KO(2), Van Treuren WW(3), 
Loscher S(2), Sonnenburg JL(3), Bogyo M(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305 USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(4)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(5)Lead Contact.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is an enteric bacterial disease that is 
increasing in prevalence worldwide. C. difficile capitalizes on gut inflammation 
and microbiome dysbiosis to establish infection, with symptoms ranging from 
watery diarrhea to toxic megacolon. We reported that the safe-in-human clinical 
drug ebselen (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03013400, NCT01452607, NCT00762671, and 
NCT02603081) has biochemical, cell-based, and in vivo efficacy against the 
toxins of C. difficile. Here, we show that ebselen treatment reduces recurrence 
rates and decreases colitis in a hamster model of relapsing CDI. Furthermore, 
ebselen treatment does not alter microbiome diversity and promotes recovery back 
to that of healthy controls after antibiotic-induced dysbiosis in healthy and C. 
difficile-infected mice. This increased microbiome recovery upon ebselen 
treatment correlates with a decrease in host-derived inflammatory markers, 
suggesting that the anti-inflammatory properties of ebselen, combined with its 
anti-toxin function, help to mitigate the major clinical challenges of CDI, 
including recurrence, microbial dysbiosis, and colitis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xcrm.2020.100005
PMCID: PMC7263476
PMID: 32483557

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS M.B. is a co-founder, 
chair of the Scientific Advisory Board and shareholder of Facile Therapeutics, 
which is a company working to develop ebselen for treatment of CDI. The authors 
declare a patent application WO2015/200358Al that covers the use of ebselen for 
treatment of C. difficile infections.


53. Gut Microbes. 2019;10(2):251-259. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2018.1518554. Epub 2018 
Sep 25.

Impact of early-life events on the susceptibility to Clostridium difficile 
colonisation and infection in the offspring of the pig.

Grześkowiak ŁM(1), Pieper R(1), Huynh HA(2), Cutting SM(2), Vahjen W(1), Zentek 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)a Institute of Animal Nutrition , Freie Universität Berlin , Berlin , 
Germany.
(2)b School of Biological Sciences , Royal Holloway University of London , Egham 
, UK.

Clostridium difficile has been documented as a major cause of uncontrolled 
outbreaks of enteritis in neonatal pigs and antibiotic-associated infections in 
clinical settings. It belongs to the natural cohort of early colonisers of the 
gastrointestinal tract of pigs and can be detected in faeces up to two weeks 
post-partum. In older pigs, it often remains under the detection limit. Most 
neonatal pigs show no clinical signs of disease although C. difficile and its 
toxins can be detected at high levels in faeces. Increased mortality rates 
associated with C. difficile on pig farms are, so far, considered "spontaneous" 
and the predisposing factors are mostly not defined. The infection caused by C. 
difficile is multifactorial and it is likely that the repertoire of maternal 
factors, host physiology, the individually developing gut microbiota, 
co-infections and environmental stress define the conditions for disease 
development. In this addendum to our recently published work on CDI in neonatal 
piglets, we discuss the "early-life events" that influence C. difficile spread 
and infection in neonatal piglets.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2018.1518554
PMCID: PMC6546313
PMID: 30252612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Can J Vet Res. 2018 Jan;82(1):66-69.

Livestock-associated methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and Clostridium 
difficile in wild Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) from Ontario swine farms.

Rothenburger JL(1), Rousseau JD(1), Weese JS(1), Jardine CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology (Rothenburger, Rousseau, Weese, Jardine) and 
Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative Ontario-Nunavut Region (Rothenburger, 
Jardine), Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario.

Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Clostridium difficile are 
important human pathogens that are also carried by animals. The role of wild 
mammals on farms in their maintenance and transmission, however, is poorly 
understood. To determine if Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) are potential 
carriers of these bacteria on Canadian farms, we tested 21 rats from swine farms 
in Ontario. The MRSA spa type t034 was isolated from 1 (4.8%) rat. This 
livestock-associated strain often colonizes pigs and pig farmers, suggesting 
that transmission among rats and pigs or environmental transmission is possible 
on pig farms. Clostridium difficile ribotype 078 was isolated from 1 rat from a 
different farm. This strain is associated with infection in piglets, calves, and 
humans. The identification of MRSA and C. difficile in Norway rats on farms in 
Canada adds to the growing knowledge about the role of rats in the ecology of 
these pathogens. Further studies are required to determine if rats play a part 
in the epidemiology of these pathogens on farms.

Publisher: Les bactéries Staphylococcus aureus résistants à la méthicilline 
(SARM) et Clostridium difficile sont des agents pathogènes importants chez 
l’humain et sont également retrouvées chez des animaux. Le rôle des animaux 
sauvages sur les fermes en lien avec leur maintenance et transmission est 
toutefois peu compris. Afin de déterminer si les rats (Rattus norvegicus) sont 
des porteurs potentiels de ces bactéries sur les fermes canadiennes, nous avons 
testé 21 rats provenant de fermes porcines en Ontario. Du SARM spa type t034 fut 
isolé à partir de un rat (4,8 %). Cette souche associée au bétail colonise 
souvent les porcs et les éleveurs de porcs, suggérant ainsi que la transmission 
entre les rats et les rats ou la transmission environnementale est possible sur 
les fermes porcines. Le ribotype 078 de Clostridium difficile fut isolé de un 
rat sur une ferme différente. Cette souche est associée à l’infection chez des 
porcelets, des veaux, et les humains. L’identification de SARM et de C. 
difficile chez des rats sur des fermes au Canada accroit les connaissances sur 
le rôle des rats dans l’écologie de ces agents pathogènes. Des études 
supplémentaires sont requises afin de déterminer si les rats jouent un rôle dans 
l’épidémiologie de ces agents pathogènes sur les fermes.(Traduit par Docteur 
Serge Messier).

PMCID: PMC5764037
PMID: 29382971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Dec 21;62(1):e01513-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.01513-17. Print 2018 Jan.

Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 Inhibit Clostridium difficile Toxin A- and B-Mediated 
Inflammatory Responses via Inhibition of NF-κB Activity.

Koon HW(1), Wang J(1)(2), Mussatto CC(1), Ortiz C(1), Lee EC(1), Tran DH(1), 
Chen X(3), Kelly CP(3), Pothoulakis C(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Vatche and Tamar Manoukian Division 
of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical 
University, Shenyang City, Liaoning Province, China.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Vatche and Tamar Manoukian Division 
of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA 
cpothoulakis@mednet.ucla.edu.

Clostridium difficile causes diarrhea and colitis by releasing toxin A and toxin 
B. In the human colon, both toxins cause intestinal inflammation and stimulate 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) expression via the activation of NF-κB. It 
is well established that the macrolide antibiotic fidaxomicin is associated with 
reduced relapses of C. difficile infection. We showed that fidaxomicin and its 
primary metabolite OP-1118 significantly inhibited toxin A-mediated intestinal 
inflammation in mice in vivo and toxin A-induced cell rounding in vitro We aim 
to determine whether fidaxomicin and OP-1118 possess anti-inflammatory effects 
against toxin A and toxin B in the human colon and examine the mechanism of this 
response. We used fresh human colonic explants, NCM460 human colonic epithelial 
cells, and RAW264.7 mouse macrophages to study the mechanism of the activity of 
fidaxomicin and OP-1118 against toxin A- and B-mediated cytokine expression and 
apoptosis. Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 dose-dependently inhibited toxin A- and 
B-induced TNF-α and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) mRNA expression and histological 
damage in human colonic explants. Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 inhibited toxin 
A-mediated NF-κB phosphorylation in human and mouse intestinal mucosae. 
Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 also inhibited toxin A-mediated NF-κB phosphorylation 
and TNF-α expression in macrophages, which was reversed by the NF-κB activator 
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA). Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 prevented toxin A- and 
B-mediated apoptosis in NCM460 cells, which was reversed by the addition of PMA. 
PMA reversed the cytoprotective effect of fidaxomicin and OP-1118 in 
toxin-exposed human colonic explants. Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 inhibit C. 
difficile toxin A- and B-mediated inflammatory responses, NF-κB phosphorylation, 
and tissue damage in the human colon.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01513-17
PMCID: PMC5740352
PMID: 29038278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. PLoS One. 2017 Nov 27;12(11):e0187212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187212. 
eCollection 2017.

Clostridium difficile flagellin FliC: Evaluation as adjuvant and use in a 
mucosal vaccine against Clostridium difficile.

Bruxelle JF(1), Mizrahi A(1)(2), Hoÿs S(1), Collignon A(1), Janoir C(1), Péchiné 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)EA4043 Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Univ. Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry Cedex, France.
(2)Service de Microbiologie Clinique, Groupe Hospitalier Paris Saint Joseph, 
Paris, France.

The immunogenicity of bacterial flagellin has been reported in different 
studies. By its close interaction with the immune system, the flagellin 
represents an interesting adjuvant and vaccine candidate. Salmonella Typhimurium 
flagellin has already been tested as adjuvant to stimulate mucosal immunity. 
Here, we assessed the ability of Clostridium difficile flagellin FliC to act as 
a mucosal adjuvant, first combined with ovalbumin as antigen and second with a 
C. difficile surface protein, the precursor of the S-layer proteins SlpA. Using 
ovalbumin as antigen, we compared the gut mucosal adjuvanticity of FliC to 
Salmonella Typhimurium flagellin and cholera toxin. Two routes of immunization 
were tested in a mouse model: intra-rectal and intra-peritoneal, following 
which, gut mucosal and systemic antibody responses against ovalbumin 
(Immunoglobulins G and Immunoglobulins A) were analyzed by Enzyme-Linked Immuno 
Assay in intestinal contents and in sera. In addition, ovalbumin-specific 
immunoglobulin producing cells were detected in the intestinal lamina propria by 
Enzyme-Linked Immunospot. Results showed that FliC as adjuvant for immunization 
targeting ovalbumin was able to stimulate a gut mucosal and systemic antibody 
response independently of the immunization route. In order to develop a mucosal 
vaccine to prevent C. difficile intestinal colonization, we assessed in a mouse 
model the efficacy of FliC as adjuvant compared with cholera toxin 
co-administrated with the C. difficile S-layer precursor SlpA as antigen. After 
challenge, a significant decrease of C. difficile intestinal colonization was 
observed in immunized groups compared to the control group. Our results showed 
that C. difficile FliC could be used as adjuvant in mucosal vaccination strategy 
against C. difficile infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0187212
PMCID: PMC5703446
PMID: 29176760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exist.


57. mSphere. 2019 Mar 20;4(2):e00138-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphereDirect.00138-19.

Outbreak of Murine Infection with Clostridium difficile Associated with the 
Administration of a Pre- and Perinatal Methyl Donor Diet.

Mau T(1)(2), Eckley SS(3), Bergin IL(3)(4), Saund K(5), Villano JS(3), Vendrov 
KC(6), Snitkin ES(5)(6), Young VB(7)(6), Yung R(8)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric and Palliative Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 
USA.
(3)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(4)In-Vivo Animal Core, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA youngvi@med.umich.edu ryung@med.umich.edu.
(8)Division of Geriatric and Palliative Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA youngvi@med.umich.edu 
ryung@med.umich.edu.
(9)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Care Center, VA Ann Arbor Health 
System, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Between October 2016 and June 2017, a C57BL/6J mouse colony that was undergoing 
a pre- and perinatal methyl donor supplementation diet intervention to study the 
impact of parental nutrition on offspring susceptibility to disease was found to 
suffer from an epizootic of unexpected deaths. Necropsy revealed the presence of 
severe colitis, and further investigation linked these outbreak deaths to a 
Clostridium difficile strain of ribotype 027 that we term 16N203. C. difficile 
infection (CDI) is associated with antibiotic use in humans. Current murine 
models of CDI rely on antibiotic pretreatment to establish clinical phenotypes. 
In this report, the C. difficile outbreak occurs in F1 mice linked to 
alterations in the parental diet. The diagnosis of CDI in the affected mice was 
confirmed by cecal/colonic histopathology, the presence of C. difficile bacteria 
in fecal/colonic culture, and detection of C. difficile toxins. F1 mice from 
parents fed the methyl supplementation diet also had significantly reduced 
survival (P < 0.0001) compared with F1 mice from parents fed the control diet. 
When we tested the 16N203 outbreak strain in an established mouse model of 
antibiotic-induced CDI, we confirmed that this strain is pathogenic. Our 
serendipitous observations from this spontaneous outbreak of C. difficile in 
association with a pre- and perinatal methyl donor diet suggest the important 
role that diet may play in host defense and CDI risk factors.IMPORTANCE 
Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) has become the leading cause of infectious 
diarrhea in hospitals worldwide, owing its preeminence to the emergence of 
hyperendemic strains, such as ribotype 027 (RT027). A major CDI risk factor is 
antibiotic exposure, which alters gut microbiota, resulting in the loss of 
colonization resistance. Current murine models of CDI also depend on 
pretreatment of animals with antibiotics to establish disease. The outbreak that 
we report here is unique in that the CDI occurred in mice with no antibiotic 
exposure and is associated with a pre- and perinatal methyl supplementation 
donor diet intervention study. Our investigation subsequently reveals that the 
outbreak strain that we term 16N203 is an RT027 strain, and this isolated strain 
is also pathogenic in an established murine model of CDI (with antibiotics). Our 
report of this spontaneous outbreak offers additional insight into the 
importance of environmental factors, such as diet, and CDI susceptibility.

Copyright © 2019 Mau et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphereDirect.00138-19
PMCID: PMC6429045
PMID: 30894434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Anaerobe. 2020 Feb;61:102146. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2019.102146. Epub 2019 Dec 
27.

In vitro and in vivo anti-clostridial activity of newly isolated Pediococcus 
acidilactici SPM138 against Clostridium difficile.

Choi MK(1), Choi S(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Sahmyook University, Seoul, 01795, South Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Sahmyook University, Seoul, 01795, South Korea. 
Electronic address: 1220sschoi@gmail.com.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) has become a growing health concern, as 
evident from the increase in the mortality rate among elderly or hospitalized 
patients. Treatment of CDI is usually based on antibiotics (metronidazole and 
vancomycin), but it has some limitations, including cost and antibiotic 
resistance. Probiotics could offer an effective remedy to prevent CDI and could 
be an auxiliary agent in treatment CDI. Here, the anti-clostridial activity of a 
newly isolated probiotic strain, Pediococcus acidilactici SPM138 (SPM138) was 
evaluated. The cultivation of C. difficile (CD) with SPM138, inhibited the 
growth of CD and significantly reduced CD toxins level. The result of MTT assay 
showed that, incubation with 25% CD culture supernatant decreased the survival 
rate of HT-29 cells to less than 20%. However, the survival rate of these cells 
increased to 98% in the presence of the 25% CD + SPM138 supernatant. The mRNA 
expression of IL-6, IL-8 and PTGS2 in HT-29 cells decreased by more than 60% 
upon incubation with CD + SPM138 co-cultures as compared to the levels observed 
after treatment with CD supernatant only. The concentration of IL-8 also 
decreased by more than 60% upon treatment with CD + SPM138 co-culture 
supernatant. In a C. difficile PCR ribotype 027-infected mouse model, the 
concentration of CD toxin in stool samples of SPM138-fed mice was only 37% of 
that reported in C. difficile 027-infected group. These findings show that 
P. acidilactici SPM138 may be a promising probiotic in CDI.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2019.102146
PMID: 31887433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no conflict of interest.


59. Vet Microbiol. 2019 Apr;231:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2019.02.026. Epub 2019 
Feb 20.

Non-toxigenic strain of Clostridioides difficile Z31 reduces the occurrence of 
C. difficile infection (CDI) in one-day-old piglets on a commercial pig farm.

Oliveira Júnior CA(1), Silva ROS(2), Lage AP(1), Coura FM(1), Ramos CP(1), 
Alfieri AA(3), Guedes RMC(1), Lobato FCF(1).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Av. Antônio 
Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, CEP 31.270-901, Brazil.
(2)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Av. Antônio 
Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, CEP 31.270-901, Brazil. Electronic address: 
rodrigo.otaviosilva@gmail.com.
(3)Universidade Estadual de Londrina (UEL), Rodovia Celso Garcia Cid, PR 445, Km 
380, Campus Universitário, Londrina, PR, CEP 86.057-970, Brazil.

Neonatal porcine diarrhea (NPD) is a current problem on pig farms and is caused 
by several enteropathogens. Among them, Clostridioides difficile stands out due 
to its importance in piglets and zoonotic potential. A non-toxigenic strain of 
C. difficile (NTCD), named Z31, was previously tested in hamster and piglet 
experimental models as a strategy to prevent C. difficile infection (CDI). To 
evaluate the capacity of the strain Z31 to prevent CDI and NPD in one-day-old 
piglets on a commercial farm, 90 piglets from 16 litters received 1 × 106 spores 
of Z31 while 84 animals from the same litters served as controls. Animals were 
clinically evaluated, and fecal samples were collected 24 h after administration 
and submitted to A/B toxin detection and isolation of C. difficile. Stool 
samples were also submitted to rotavirus, Escherichia coli, and Clostridium 
perfringens detection. Administration of Z31 reduced the incidence of CDI in 
treated animals (7.8%) when compared to the control group (25.0%; P = 0.003). In 
animals that developed CDI, the intensity of diarrhea was lower in those that 
received Z31 than in the control group. Neonatal porcine diarrhea was reduced in 
treated animals when compared to untreated animals (P < 0.001). The present 
study suggests that Z31 can potentially be used to prevent CDI in piglets on 
commercial farms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2019.02.026
PMID: 30955794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Anaerobe. 2013 Aug;22:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.05.005. Epub 2013 May 
29.

A clinical and epidemiological review of non-toxigenic Clostridium difficile.

Natarajan M(1), Walk ST, Young VB, Aronoff DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, 5510-E 
MSRB I, 1150 W. Medical Center Dr., Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5680, USA.

Clostridium difficile is a significant nosocomial threat to human health and is 
the most commonly identified cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. The 
development of C. difficile colitis requires production of toxins A and/or B, 
but some strains do not express these proteins. These non-toxigenic C. difficile 
(NTCD) have garnered attention for their capacity to colonize humans and 
potentially reduce the risk for symptomatic colitis caused by toxigenic strains. 
Isolates of NTCD have been obtained from the environment as well as from animal 
and human sources. Studies in a hamster CDI model have demonstrated a protective 
effect of NTCD against toxigenic infection. The extent to which this protective 
effect of NTCD occurs in humans remains to be defined. Evidence for a 
therapeutic or preventive role for NTCD is limited but clinical prophylaxis 
studies are ongoing. NTCD potentially represents an exciting new tool in 
preventing CDI and its recurrences.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.05.005
PMCID: PMC3729612
PMID: 23727391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Appl Microbiol. 2017 Feb;122(2):462-472. doi: 10.1111/jam.13343. Epub 2016 Dec 
18.

Presence of Clostridium difficile in pig faecal samples and wild animal species 
associated with pig farms.

Andrés-Lasheras S(1), Bolea R(1), Mainar-Jaime RC(1), Kuijper E(2), Sevilla 
E(1), Martín-Burriel I(3), Chirino-Trejo M(4).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Patología Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Instituto 
Agroalimentario de Aragón-IA2-(Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Centre of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(3)Laboratorio de Genética Bioquímica (LAGENBIO), Facultad de Veterinaria, 
Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón-IA2-(Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), 
Zaragoza, Spain.
(4)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, Canada.

AIMS: To determine the presence of Clostridium difficile on fattening pig farms 
in north-eastern Spain.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twenty-seven farms were sampled. Pools of pig faecal 
samples (n = 210), samples of intestinal content from common farm pest species 
(n = 95) and environment-related samples (n = 93) were collected. Isolates were 
tested for toxin genes of C. difficile, and typed by PCR-ribotyping and 
toxinotyping. The minimal inhibitory concentrations of six antimicrobial agents 
were determined using Etest. Thirty-four isolates were obtained from 12 farms, 
and 30 (88·2%) had toxin genes. Seven ribotypes were identified. Ribotype 078 
and its variant 126 were predominant (52·9%). The same ribotypes were isolated 
from different animal species on the same farm. None of the isolates were 
resistant to metronidazole or vancomycin.
CONCLUSIONS: Clostridium difficile was common within the pig farm environment. 
Most of the positive samples came from pest species or were pest-related 
environmental samples.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: Pest species were colonized with toxigenic 
and antimicrobial-resistant C. difficile strains of the same ribotypes that are 
found in humans and pigs. Rodents and pigeons may transmit toxigenic and 
antimicrobial-resistant C. difficile strains that are of the same ribotypes as 
those occuring in humans.

© 2016 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/jam.13343
PMID: 27990723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Anaerobe. 2018 Jun;51:1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.03.002. Epub 2018 Mar 6.

Improving culture media for the isolation of Clostridium difficile from compost.

Dharmasena M(1), Jiang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food, Nutrition, and Packaging Sciences, Clemson University, 
Clemson, SC 29634, USA.
(2)Department of Food, Nutrition, and Packaging Sciences, Clemson University, 
Clemson, SC 29634, USA. Electronic address: xiuping@clemson.edu.

This study was to optimize the detection methods for Clostridium difficile from 
the animal manure-based composts. Both autoclaved and unautoclaved dairy 
composts were inoculated with a 12-h old suspension of a non-toxigenic 
C. difficile strain (ATCC 43593) and then plated on selected agar for vegetative 
cells and endospores. Six types of enrichment broths supplemented with 
taurocholate and l-cysteine were assessed for detecting a low level of 
artificially inoculated C. difficile (ca. 5 spores/g) from dairy composts. The 
efficacy of selected enrichment broths was further evaluated by isolating 
C. difficile from 29 commercial compost samples. Our results revealed that using 
heat-shock was more effective than using ethanol-shock for inducing endospore 
germination, and the highest endospore count (p < 0.05) was yielded at 60 °C for 
25 min. C. difficile agar base, supplemented with 0.1% l-cysteine, 7% 
defibrinated horse blood, and cycloserine-cefoxitin (CDA-CYS-H-CC agar) was the 
best medium (p < 0.05) for recovering vegetative cells from compost. 
C. difficile endospore populations from both types of composts enumerated on 
both CDA-CYS-H-CC agar supplemented with 0.1% sodium taurocholate 
(CDA-CYS-H-CC-T agar) and brain heart infusion agar supplemented with 0.5% yeast 
extract, 0.1% l-cysteine, cycloserine-cefoxitin, and 0.1% sodium taurocholate 
(BHIA-YE-CYS-CC-T agar) media were not significantly different from each other 
(p > 0.05). Overall, enrichment of inoculated compost samples in broths 
containing moxalactam-norfloxacin (MN) produced significantly higher (p < 0.05) 
spore counts than in non-selective broths or broths supplemented with CC. 
Enrichment in BHIB-YE-CYS-MN-T broth followed by culturing on an agar containing 
7% horse blood and 0.1% taurocholate provided a more sensitive and selective 
combination of media for detecting a low population of C. difficile from 
environmental samples with high background microflora.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.03.002
PMID: 29518533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Vet Microbiol. 2013 Nov 29;167(1-2):42-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.03.032. 
Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Clostridium difficile infection in horses: a review.

Diab SS(1), Songer G, Uzal FA.

Author information:
(1)California Animal Health and Food Safety Laboratory, San Bernardino Branch, 
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA 92408, USA.

Clostridium difficile is considered one of the most important causes of diarrhea 
and enterocolitis in horses. Foals and adult horses are equally susceptible to 
the infection. The highly resistant spore of C. difficile is the infectious unit 
of transmission, which occurs primarily via the fecal-oral route, with sources 
of infection including equine feces, contaminated soil, animal hospitals, and 
feces of other animals. Two major risk factors for the development of C. 
difficile associated disease (CDAD) in adult horses are hospitalization and 
antimicrobial treatment, although sporadically, cases of CDAD can occur in 
horses that have not received antimicrobials or been hospitalized. The most 
common antibiotics associated with CDAD in horses are erythromycin, 
trimethoprim/sulfonamides, β-lactam antimicrobials, clindamycin, rifampicin, and 
gentamicin. Clinical signs and intestinal lesions of CDAD infection are not 
specific and they cannot be used to distinguish infections by C. difficile from 
infections by other agents, such as Clostridium perfringens or Salmonella sp. 
The distribution of lesions throughout the intestinal tract seems to be 
age-dependent. Small intestine is invariably affected, and colon and cecum may 
or may not have lesions in foals<1-month old. Naturally acquired disease in 
older foals and adult horses has a more aboral distribution, affecting colon and 
sometimes cecum, but rarely the small intestine. Detection of toxin A, toxin B 
or both in intestinal contents or feces is considered the most reliable 
diagnostic criterion for CDAD in horses. Isolation of toxigenic strains of C. 
difficile from horses with intestinal disease is highly suggestive of CDAD. A 
better understanding of pathogenesis, reservoirs of infection, and vaccines and 
other methods of control is needed. Also further studies are recommended to 
investigate other possible predisposing factors and/or etiological agents of 
enteric diseases of horses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.03.032
PMID: 23642413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2019 Oct 17;9:356. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00356. 
eCollection 2019.

The Transcriptional Regulator Lrp Contributes to Toxin Expression, Sporulation, 
and Swimming Motility in Clostridium difficile.

Chen KY(1), Rathod J(2), Chiu YC(1), Chen JW(1)(3), Tsai PJ(3)(4), Huang 
IH(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Earth Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive, spore-forming bacterium, and major 
cause of nosocomial diarrhea. Related studies have identified numerous factors 
that influence virulence traits such as the production of the two primary 
toxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), as well as sporulation, motility, and 
biofilm formation. However, multiple putative transcriptional regulators are 
reportedly encoded in the genome, and additional factors are likely involved in 
virulence regulation. Although the leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) 
has been studied extensively in Gram-negative bacteria, little is known about 
its function in Gram-positive bacteria, although homologs have been identified 
in the genome. This study revealed that disruption of the lone lrp homolog in C. 
difficile decelerated growth under nutrient-limiting conditions, increased TcdA 
and TcdB production. Lrp was also found to negatively regulate sporulation while 
positively regulate swimming motility in strain R20291, but not in strain 630. 
The C. difficile Lrp appeared to function through transcriptional repression or 
activation. In addition, the lrp mutant was relatively virulent in a mouse model 
of infection. The results of this study collectively demonstrated that Lrp has 
broad regulatory function in C. difficile toxin expression, sporulation, 
motility, and pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2019 Chen, Rathod, Chiu, Chen, Tsai and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2019.00356
PMCID: PMC6811523
PMID: 31681632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Sep 12;14(9):e1007191. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007191. 
eCollection 2018 Sep.

Para-cresol production by Clostridium difficile affects microbial diversity and 
membrane integrity of Gram-negative bacteria.

Passmore IJ(1), Letertre MPM(2), Preston MD(3), Bianconi I(4), Harrison MA(1), 
Nasher F(1), Kaur H(1), Hong HA(4), Baines SD(5), Cutting SM(4), Swann JR(2), 
Wren BW(1), Dawson LF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of Hygiene and 
Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Surgery & Cancer, Imperial College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Bioinformatics and Next Generation sequencing core facility, National 
Institute for Biological Standards and Control South Mimms, Potters Bar, United 
Kingdom.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Royal Holloway University of London, 
Egham, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Hertfordshire, Hatfield, United Kingdom.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive spore-forming anaerobe and a major 
cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea. Disruption of the commensal 
microbiota, such as through treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics, is a 
critical precursor for colonisation by C. difficile and subsequent disease. 
Furthermore, failure of the gut microbiota to recover colonisation resistance 
can result in recurrence of infection. An unusual characteristic of C. difficile 
among gut bacteria is its ability to produce the bacteriostatic compound 
para-cresol (p-cresol) through fermentation of tyrosine. Here, we demonstrate 
that the ability of C. difficile to produce p-cresol in vitro provides a 
competitive advantage over gut bacteria including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella 
oxytoca and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. Metabolic profiling of competitive 
co-cultures revealed that acetate, alanine, butyrate, isobutyrate, p-cresol and 
p-hydroxyphenylacetate were the main metabolites responsible for differentiating 
the parent strain C. difficile (630Δerm) from a defined mutant deficient in 
p-cresol production. Moreover, we show that the p-cresol mutant displays a 
fitness defect in a mouse relapse model of C. difficile infection (CDI). 
Analysis of the microbiome from this mouse model of CDI demonstrates that 
colonisation by the p-cresol mutant results in a distinctly altered intestinal 
microbiota, and metabolic profile, with a greater representation of 
Gammaproteobacteria, including the Pseudomonales and Enterobacteriales. We 
demonstrate that Gammaproteobacteria are susceptible to exogenous p-cresol in 
vitro and that there is a clear divide between bacterial Phyla and their 
susceptibility to p-cresol. In general, Gram-negative species were relatively 
sensitive to p-cresol, whereas Gram-positive species were more tolerant. This 
study demonstrates that production of p-cresol by C. difficile has an effect on 
the viability of intestinal bacteria as well as the major metabolites produced 
in vitro. These observations are upheld in a mouse model of CDI, in which 
p-cresol production affects the biodiversity of gut microbiota and faecal 
metabolite profiles, suggesting that p-cresol production contributes to C. 
difficile survival and pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007191
PMCID: PMC6135563
PMID: 30208103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


66. Mol Microbiol. 2016 Jun;100(6):954-71. doi: 10.1111/mmi.13361. Epub 2016 Mar 22.

A novel regulator controls Clostridium difficile sporulation, motility and toxin 
production.

Edwards AN(1), Tamayo R(2), McBride SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic pathogen that forms spores which promote 
survival in the environment and transmission to new hosts. The regulatory 
pathways by which C. difficile initiates spore formation are poorly understood. 
We identified two factors with limited similarity to the Rap sporulation 
proteins of other spore-forming bacteria. In this study, we show that disruption 
of the gene CD3668 reduces sporulation and increases toxin production and 
motility. This mutant was more virulent and exhibited increased toxin gene 
expression in the hamster model of infection. Based on these phenotypes, we have 
renamed this locus rstA, for regulator of sporulation and toxins. Our data 
demonstrate that RstA is a bifunctional protein that upregulates sporulation 
through an unidentified pathway and represses motility and toxin production by 
influencing sigD transcription. Conserved RstA orthologs are present in other 
pathogenic and industrial Clostridium species and may represent a key regulatory 
protein controlling clostridial sporulation.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.13361
PMCID: PMC4899322
PMID: 26915493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interests.


67. mBio. 2019 Jan 8;10(1):e02282-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02282-18.

Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs Alter the Microbiota and Exacerbate 
Clostridium difficile Colitis while Dysregulating the Inflammatory Response.

Maseda D(#)(1), Zackular JP(#)(1), Trindade B(2), Kirk L(2), Roxas JL(3), Rogers 
LM(2), Washington MK(1), Du L(4), Koyama T(4), Viswanathan VK(3), Vedantam G(3), 
Schloss PD(5), Crofford LJ(2), Skaar EP(1), Aronoff DM(6)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(3)School of Animal and Comparative Biomedical Sciences, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, Arizona, USA.
(4)Center for Quantitative Sciences, Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA d.aronoff@vanderbilt.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    mBio. 2020 Jan 14;11(1):
    mBio. 2020 Jan 28;11(1):

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major public health threat worldwide. 
The use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) is associated with 
enhanced susceptibility to and severity of CDI; however, the mechanisms driving 
this phenomenon have not been elucidated. NSAIDs alter prostaglandin (PG) 
metabolism by inhibiting cyclooxygenase (COX) enzymes. Here, we found that 
treatment with the NSAID indomethacin prior to infection altered the microbiota 
and dramatically increased mortality and the intestinal pathology associated 
with CDI in mice. We demonstrated that in C. difficile-infected animals, 
indomethacin treatment led to PG deregulation, an altered proinflammatory 
transcriptional and protein profile, and perturbed epithelial cell junctions. 
These effects were paralleled by increased recruitment of intestinal neutrophils 
and CD4+ cells and also by a perturbation of the gut microbiota. Together, these 
data implicate NSAIDs in the disruption of protective COX-mediated PG production 
during CDI, resulting in altered epithelial integrity and associated immune 
responses.IMPORTANCE Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a spore-forming 
anaerobic bacterium and leading cause of antibiotic-associated colitis. 
Epidemiological data suggest that use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs) increases the risk for CDI in humans, a potentially important 
observation given the widespread use of NSAIDs. Prior studies in rodent models 
of CDI found that NSAID exposure following infection increases the severity of 
CDI, but mechanisms to explain this are lacking. Here we present new data from a 
mouse model of antibiotic-associated CDI suggesting that brief NSAID exposure 
prior to CDI increases the severity of the infectious colitis. These data shed 
new light on potential mechanisms linking NSAID use to worsened CDI, including 
drug-induced disturbances to the gut microbiome and colonic epithelial 
integrity. Studies were limited to a single NSAID (indomethacin), so future 
studies are needed to assess the generalizability of our findings and to 
establish a direct link to the human condition.

Copyright © 2019 Maseda et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02282-18
PMCID: PMC6325247
PMID: 30622186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Epidemiol Infect. 2010 Aug;138(8):1100-4. doi: 10.1017/S0950268809991312. Epub 
2009 Dec 2.

Evaluation of Clostridium difficile in dogs and the household environment.

Weese JS(1), Finley R, Reid-Smith RR, Janecko N, Rousseau J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, Ontario, Canada. jsweese@uoguelph.ca

Clostridium difficile may be an emerging community-associated pathogen but 
little is known about its sources of exposure. This study evaluated C. difficile 
contamination in households and colonization of pets. C. difficile was isolated 
from 44/836 (5.3%) sites in 26/84 (31%) households. Ribotype 027 was the most 
common (25%) environmental strain. C. difficile was isolated from 14/139 (10%) 
dogs. Living with an immunocompromised individual was associated with C. 
difficile colonization in dogs. All toxigenic strains identified in pets have 
been isolated from humans in Ontario. C. difficile was isolated concurrently 
from dogs and the environment in four households, but in all cases canine and 
environmental ribotypes were different. C. difficile was relatively common in 
households, suggesting that exposure to this pathogen may be a regular event. 
There was no evidence that dogs are a significant source of household C. 
difficile contamination.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268809991312
PMID: 19951453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Environ Res. 2011 Nov;111(8):1027-32. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2011.09.014. Epub 
2011 Oct 19.

Aerial dissemination of Clostridium difficile on a pig farm and its environment.

Keessen EC(1), Donswijk CJ, Hol SP, Hermanus C, Kuijper EJ, Lipman LJ.

Author information:
(1)Utrecht University, Division of Public Health and Food Safety, Institute for 
Risk Assessment Sciences, PO Box 80175, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Clostridium difficile is increasingly recognized as an important enteropathogen 
in both humans and animals. The finding of C. difficile in air samples in 
hospitals suggests a role for aerial dissemination in the transmission of human 
C. difficile infection. The present study was designed to investigate the 
occurrence of airborne C. difficile in, and nearby a pig farm with a high 
prevalence of C. difficile. Airborne colony counts in the farrowing pens peaked 
on the moments shortly after or during personnel activity in the pens (P=0.043 
(farrowing pens 1, 2), P=0.034 (farrowing pen 2)). A decrease in airborne C. 
difficile colony counts was observed parallel to aging of the piglets. Airborne 
C. difficile was detected up to 20 m distant from the farm. This study showed 
widespread aerial dissemination of C. difficile on a pig farm that was 
positively associated with personnel activity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2011.09.014
PMID: 22014605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Anaerobe. 2017 Dec;48:224-231. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.09.002. Epub 2017 
Sep 18.

Molecular analysis of three Clostridium difficile strain genomes isolated from 
pig farm-related samples.

Martín-Burriel I(1), Andrés-Lasheras S(2), Harders F(3), Mainar-Jaime RC(2), 
Ranera B(4), Zaragoza P(4), Falceto V(2), Bolea Y(2), Kuijper E(5), Bolea R(2), 
Bossers A(3), Chirino-Trejo M(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Genética Bioquímica (LAGENBIO), Facultad de Veterinaria, 
Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), 
Zaragoza, Spain. Electronic address: minma@unizar.es.
(2)Departamento de Patología Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Instituto 
Agroalimentario de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), Zaragoza, 
Spain.
(3)Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Lelystad, The Netherlands.
(4)Laboratorio de Genética Bioquímica (LAGENBIO), Facultad de Veterinaria, 
Instituto Agroalimentario de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), 
Zaragoza, Spain.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Centre of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary 
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic spore-forming bacillus that usually causes 
gastrointestinal disorders in man and other animal species. Most of the strains 
isolated from animals are toxigenic being the virulent ribotype (RT) 078 
predominant in several animal species. Although C. difficile is pathogenic to 
both humans and animals, there is no direct evidence of zoonosis. Deep genome 
sequencing provides sufficient resolution to analyse which strains found in 
animals might be related to human pathogens. So far, there are only a few fully 
sequenced genomes of C. difficile strains isolated from domestic and wild 
animals. Using Illumina technology, we have sequenced the genome of three 
isolates; a strain isolated from the vagina of a sow (5754), one from rat 
(Rattus spp) intestinal content (RC10) and a third one isolated from 
environmental rat faeces (RF17). Both, rat and rat faeces were sampled in 
fattening pig farms. Our study reveals a close genetic relationship of two of 
these isolates with the virulent strain M120 (RT078) isolated from a human 
patient. The analysis of the sequences has revealed the presence of antibiotic 
resistance genes, mobile elements, including the transposon linked with 
virulence Tn6164, and the similarity of virulence factors between these isolates 
and human strains. This is the first study focused on the sequencing of 
C. difficile genomes obtained from wild animals like rats, which can be 
considered as potential reservoirs for humans and other animal species. This 
study can help to understand the genome composition and epidemiology of this 
bacterium species.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.09.002
PMID: 28928035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Int J Food Microbiol. 2017 Feb 2;242:37-44. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2016.11.010. Epub 2016 Nov 12.

Prevalence and molecular characterization of Clostridium difficile isolates from 
a pig slaughterhouse, pork, and humans in Taiwan.

Wu YC(1), Chen CM(2), Kuo CJ(3), Lee JJ(4), Chen PC(5), Chang YC(6), Chen TH(7).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No. 250, Guoguang Rd., South Dist., 
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: pata0112@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Internal Medicine, Tungs' 
Taichung MetroHarbor Hospital, No.699, Sec. 8, Taiwan Blvd., Taichung 435, 
Taiwan; Department of Health Food, Chung Chou University of Science and 
Technology, No. 6, Lane 2, Sec. 3, Shanjiao Rd., Yuanlin Township, Changhua 510, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: chioming2002@yahoo.com.tw.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No. 250, 
Guoguang Rd., South Dist., Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
ck476@nchu.edu.tw.
(4)Graduate Institute of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No. 250, Guoguang Rd., South Dist., 
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: frinlee@hotmail.com.
(5)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Public Health, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No. 250, Guoguang Rd., South Dist., 
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: 220aall@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, China Medical 
University, No. 91 Hsuehshih Rd., Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
yichih@mail.cmu.edu.tw.
(7)Graduate Institute of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No. 250, Guoguang Rd., South Dist., 
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: thc@dragon.nchu.edu.tw.

Clostridium difficile causes antibiotic-associated diarrhea in both humans and 
animals. The ribotype 078, predominant in food animals, is associated with 
community-acquired C. difficile infection, and C. difficile is suggested to be a 
foodborne pathogen. Recently, the C. difficile ribotype 078 lineage emerged in 
patients and pigs in Taiwan. This study aimed to investigate the prevalence and 
molecular characterization of C. difficile isolated from a pig slaughterhouse, 
retail meat, ready-to-eat meals, and humans in Taiwan. We collected samples from 
one slaughterhouse (n=422), 29 retail markets (raw pork, n=62; ready-to-eat 
pork, n=65), and one hospital (non-diarrheal humans, stool, n=317) in 2015. The 
isolated C. difficile were subjected to ribotyping and multilocus 
variable-number tandem-repeat analysis (MLVA). In the slaughterhouse, the 
isolation rate from carcasses was high (23%, 21/92) and ribotype 126 dominated. 
Scalding water was found to have C. difficile contamination (44%, 4/9), and two 
of the seven isolates were ribotype 126. The isolation rates from raw pork and 
ready-to-eat pork were between 20% and 29%. Ribotypes 126, 127, and 014 were 
found in raw pork, whereas ribotype 078 was not identified in this study. Eight 
isolates-seven non-toxigenic isolates and one ribotype 017-were found in 
non-diarrheal human samples. Notably, MLVA showed that ribotype 126 isolates 
from the slaughterhouse, pig stool, colons, carcasses, and scalding water were 
closely genetically related, indicating serious risk for cross-contamination. 
However, the genetic evidence of foodborne transmission from carcasses to food 
and humans is still lacking.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2016.11.010
PMID: 27870984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Anaerobe. 2017 Dec;48:47-55. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.06.023. Epub 2017 Jul 
5.

Prevalence and characteristics of Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium 
difficile in dogs and cats attended in diverse veterinary clinics from the 
Madrid region.

Álvarez-Pérez S(1), Blanco JL(2), Harmanus C(3), Kuijper EJ(3), García ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jlblanco@ucm.es.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Center of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Despite extensive research on the epidemiology of pathogenic clostridia in dogs 
and cats, most published studies focus on a selected animal population and/or a 
single veterinary medical centre. We assessed the burden of Clostridium 
perfringens and C. difficile shedding by small animals in 17 veterinary clinics 
located within the Madrid region (Spain) and differing in size, number and 
features of animals attended and other relevant characteristics. In addition, we 
studied the genetic diversity and antibiotic susceptibility of recovered 
isolates. Selective culture of all fecal specimens collected during a single 
week from dogs (n = 105) and cats (n = 37) attended in participating clinics 
yielded C. perfringens/C. difficile from 31%, 4.8% of the dogs, and 20%, 0% of 
the cats analyzed, respectively, and three dogs yielded both species. 
Furthermore, 17 animals (15 dogs and two cats) that yielded a positive culture 
for either species were recruited for a follow-up survey and C. perfringens was 
again obtained from nine dogs. Considerable differences in prevalence were 
observed among participating clinics for both clostridial species. 
C. perfringens isolates (n = 109) belonged to toxinotypes A (97.2%) and E (three 
isolates from one dog), whereas C. difficile isolates (n = 18) belonged to the 
toxigenic ribotypes 106 (33.3%) and 154 (16.7%), a 009-like ribotype (33.3%) and 
an unknown non-toxigenic ribotype (16.7%). Amplified fragment length 
polymorphism-based fingerprinting classified C. perfringens and C. difficile 
isolates into 105 and 15 genotypes, respectively, and tested isolates displayed 
in vitro resistance to benzylpenicillin (2.8%, 88.8%), clindamycin (0%, 16.7%), 
erythromycin (0.9%, 16.7%), imipenem (1.8%, 100%), levofloxacin (0.9%, 100%), 
linezolid (5.5%, 0%), metronidazole (4.6%, 0%) and/or tetracycline (7.3%, 0%). 
All animals from which multiple isolates were retrieved yielded ≥2 different 
genotypes and/or antimicrobial susceptibility profiles. Future studies should 
focus on the seasonal and geographical variations of prevalence and diversity 
patterns of clostridial species in small animals.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.06.023
PMID: 28687280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Infect Dis. 2018 Jan 4;217(2):188-197. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jix414.

Innate Immune Response and Outcome of Clostridium difficile Infection Are 
Dependent on Fecal Bacterial Composition in the Aged Host.

Shin JH(1), Gao Y(2), Moore JH 2nd(3), Bolick DT(1), Kolling GL(1), Wu M(2), 
Warren CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.
(2)Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.
(3)Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2018 Jan 4;217(2):174-176.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a serious threat for an 
aging population. Using an aged mouse model, we evaluated the effect of age and 
the roles of innate immunity and intestinal microbiota.
METHODS: Aged (18 months) and young (8 weeks) mice were infected with C 
difficile, and disease severity, immune response, and intestinal microbiome were 
compared. The same experiment was repeated with intestinal microbiota exchange 
between aged and young mice before infection.
RESULTS: Higher mortality was observed in aged mice with weaker neutrophilic 
mobilization in blood and intestinal tissue and depressed proinflammatory 
cytokines in early infection. Microbiota exchange improved survival and early 
immune response in aged mice. Microbiome analysis revealed that aged mice have 
significant deficiencies in Bacteroidetes phylum and, specifically, Bacteroides, 
Alistipes, and rc4-4 genera, which were replenished by cage switching.
CONCLUSIONS: Microbiota-dependent alteration in innate immune response early on 
during infection may explain poor outcome in aged host with CDI.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jix414
PMCID: PMC5853981
PMID: 28968660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. BMC Vet Res. 2012 Jun 29;8:94. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-8-94.

Presence and molecular characterization of Clostridium difficile and Clostridium 
perfringens in intestinal compartments of healthy horses.

Schoster A(1), Arroyo LG, Staempfli HR, Shewen PE, Weese JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, Canada. aschoster@life.ku.dk

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens are commonly 
associated with colitis in equids, but healthy carriers exist. Scarce 
information is available on the prevalence of Clostridium spp. in 
gastrointestinal compartments other than faeces in healthy horses, and it is 
unknown whether faecal samples are representative of proximal compartments. The 
objectives were to investigate the prevalence of C. difficile and C. perfringens 
in different intestinal compartments of healthy adult horses and to determine 
whether faecal samples are representative of colonization in proximal sites and 
overall carrier status.
RESULTS: Toxigenic C. difficile was isolated from 14/135 (10.3%) samples from 
8/15 (53.3%) horses. Between zero and three sites were positive per horse, and 
multiple sites were positive in four horses. Isolates were recovered from 
duodenum, jejunum, ileum, right dorsal colon, small colon and rectum. When 
multiple compartments were positive in a single horse, two different C. 
difficile ribotypes were always present. Clostridium perfringens Type A (CPE, β2 
toxin gene negative) was recovered from the left ventral colon of one horse 
(0.74%, 1/135 samples). Agreement between faeces and overall C. difficile 
carrier status was good.
CONCLUSIONS: Clostridium difficile can be found in different compartments of the 
gastrointestinal tract of healthy horses, and multiple strains can be present in 
an individual horse. The prevalence of C. perfringens in healthy adult hoses was 
low, consistent with previous reports. Faecal samples were representative for 
presence of C. difficile in proximal compartments in 5/8 horses (63%) but were 
not representative for the specific strain.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-6148-8-94
PMCID: PMC3514389
PMID: 22748233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Infect Dis. 2020 Apr 27;221(10):1623-1635. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiz640.

Therapeutic Mechanism of Macrophage Inflammatory Protein 1 α Neutralizing 
Antibody (CCL3) in Clostridium difficile Infection in Mice.

Wang J(1)(2), Ortiz C(1), Fontenot L(1), Mukhopadhyay R(1), Xie Y(1)(2), Chen 
X(3), Feng H(4), Pothoulakis C(1), Koon HW(1).

Author information:
(1)Vatche and Tamar Manoukian Division of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen 
School of Medicine at the University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical 
University, Shenyang City, Liaoning Province, China.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, School of Dentistry, University of 
Maryland, Maryland, Baltimore, USA.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) causes diarrhea and colitis. 
We aimed to find a common pathogenic pathway in CDI among humans and mice by 
comparing toxin-mediated effects in human and mouse colonic tissues.
METHOD: Using multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, we determined the 
cytokine secretion of toxin A- and B-treated human and mouse colonic explants.
RESULTS: Toxin A and toxin B exposure to fresh human and mouse colonic explants 
caused different patterns of cytokine secretion. Toxin A induced macrophage 
inflammatory protein (MIP) 1α secretion in both human and mouse explants. Toxin 
A reduced the expression of chloride anion exchanger SLC26A3 expression in mouse 
colonic explants and human colonic epithelial cells. Patients with CDI had 
increased colonic MIP-1 α expression and reduced colonic SLC26A3 (solute carrier 
family 26, member 3) compared with controls. Anti-MIP-1 α neutralizing antibody 
prevented death, ameliorated colonic injury, reduced colonic interleukin 1β 
(IL-1β) messenger RNA expression, and restored colonic SLC26a3 expression in C. 
difficile-infected mice. The anti-MIP-1 α neutralizing antibody prevented CDI 
recurrence. SLC26a3 inhibition augmented colonic IL-1 β messenger RNA expression 
and abolished the protective effect of anti-MIP-1 α neutralizing antibody in 
mice with CDI.
CONCLUSION: MIP-1 α is a common toxin A-dependent chemokine in human and mouse 
colon. MIP-1 α mediates detrimental effects by reducing SLC26a3 and enhancing 
IL-1 β expression in the colon.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiz640
PMCID: PMC7184920
PMID: 31793629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Infect Immun. 2018 May 22;86(6):e00742-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00742-17. Print 2018 
Jun.

Clostridium difficile Toxoid Vaccine Candidate Confers Broad Protection against 
a Range of Prevalent Circulating Strains in a Nonclinical Setting.

Quemeneur L(1), Petiot N(2), Arnaud-Barbe N(2), Hessler C(2), Pietrobon PJ(3), 
Londoño-Hayes P(2).

Author information:
(1)Research & Development, Sanofi Pasteur, Marcy l'Etoile, France 
laurence.quemeneur@sanofi.com.
(2)Research & Development, Sanofi Pasteur, Marcy l'Etoile, France.
(3)Research & Development, Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania, USA.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a leading cause of nosocomial and 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea. A vaccine, based on formalin-inactivated toxins 
A and B purified from anaerobic cultures of C. difficile strain VPI 10463 
(toxinotype 0), has been in development for the prevention of symptomatic CDI. 
We evaluated the breadth of protection conferred by this C. difficile toxoid 
vaccine in cross-neutralization assessments using sera from vaccinated hamsters 
against a collection of 165 clinical isolates. Hamster antisera raised against 
the C. difficile toxoid vaccine neutralized the cytotoxic activity of culture 
supernatants from several toxinotype 0 strains and heterologous strains from 10 
different toxinotypes. Further assessments performed with purified toxins 
confirmed that vaccine-elicited antibodies can neutralize both A and B toxins 
from a variety of toxinotypes. In the hamster challenge model, the vaccine 
conferred significant cross-protection against disease symptoms and death caused 
by heterologous C. difficile strains from the most common phylogenetic clades, 
including the most prevalent toxinotypes.

Copyright © 2018 Quemeneur et al.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00742-17
PMCID: PMC5964523
PMID: 29632249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Anaerobe. 2016 Apr;38:94-96. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.12.013. Epub 2016 Jan 
4.

Clostridium perfringens type A netF and netE positive and Clostridium difficile 
co-infection in two adult dogs.

Diniz AN(1), Silva ROS(2), Oliveira Junior CA(1), Pierezan F(1), Lobato FCF(1).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Antônio 
Carlos Avenue, 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, 31.270-901, Brazil.
(2)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Antônio 
Carlos Avenue, 6627, Belo Horizonte, MG, 31.270-901, Brazil. Electronic address: 
rodrigo.otaviosilva@gmail.com.

The aim of this study was to report two cases of Clostridium perfringens type A 
and Clostridium difficile co-infection in adult dogs. Both animals were positive 
for A/B toxin. Toxigenic C. difficile and C. perfringens type A positive for 
NetE and NetF-encoding genes were isolated. This report reinforces the necessity 
of studying a possible synergism of C. difficile and C. perfringens in enteric 
disorders.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.12.013
PMCID: PMC7111139
PMID: 26762654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. mSphere. 2018 Jun 27;3(3):e00261-18. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00261-18. Print 2018 
Jun 27.

Clostridium difficile Alters the Structure and Metabolism of Distinct Cecal 
Microbiomes during Initial Infection To Promote Sustained Colonization.

Jenior ML(1), Leslie JL(1), Young VB(1)(2), Schloss PD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases Division, University of 
Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA pschloss@umich.edu.

Susceptibility to Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is primarily associated 
with previous exposure to antibiotics, which compromise the structure and 
function of the gut bacterial community. Specific antibiotic classes correlate 
more strongly with recurrent or persistent C. difficile infection. As such, we 
utilized a mouse model of infection to explore the effect of distinct antibiotic 
classes on the impact that infection has on community-level transcription and 
metabolic signatures shortly following pathogen colonization and how those 
changes may associate with persistence of C. difficile Untargeted metabolomic 
analysis revealed that C. difficile infection had significantly larger impacts 
on the metabolic environment across cefoperazone- and streptomycin-pretreated 
mice, which became persistently colonized compared to clindamycin-pretreated 
mice, where infection quickly became undetectable. Through metagenome-enabled 
metatranscriptomics, we observed that transcripts for genes associated with 
carbon and energy acquisition were greatly reduced in infected animals, 
suggesting that those niches were instead occupied by C. difficile Furthermore, 
the largest changes in transcription were seen in the least abundant species, 
indicating that C. difficile may "attack the loser" in gut environments where 
sustained infection occurs more readily. Overall, our results suggest that 
C. difficile is able to restructure the nutrient-niche landscape in the gut to 
promote persistent infection.IMPORTANCEClostridium difficile has become the most 
common single cause of hospital-acquired infection over the last decade in the 
United States. Colonization resistance to the nosocomial pathogen is primarily 
provided by the gut microbiota, which is also involved in clearing the infection 
as the community recovers from perturbation. As distinct antibiotics are 
associated with different risk levels for CDI, we utilized a mouse model of 
infection with 3 separate antibiotic pretreatment regimens to generate 
alternative gut microbiomes that each allowed for C. difficile colonization but 
varied in clearance rate. To assess community-level dynamics, we implemented an 
integrative multi-omics approach that revealed that infection significantly 
changed many aspects of the gut community. The degree to which the community 
changed was inversely correlated with clearance during the first 6 days of 
infection, suggesting that C. difficile differentially modifies the gut 
environment to promote persistence. This is the first time that 
metagenome-enabled metatranscriptomics have been employed to study the behavior 
of a host-associated microbiota in response to an infection. Our results allow 
for a previously unseen understanding of the ecology associated with 
C. difficile infection and provide the groundwork for identification of 
context-specific probiotic therapies.

Copyright © 2018 Jenior et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00261-18
PMCID: PMC6021602
PMID: 29950381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Vis Exp. 2016 Dec 10;(118):54850. doi: 10.3791/54850.

Cefoperazone-treated Mouse Model of Clinically-relevant Clostridium difficile 
Strain R20291.

Winston JA(1), Thanissery R(1), Montgomery SA(2), Theriot CM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, North Carolina State 
University College of Veterinary Medicine.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Lineberger Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina School of Medicine.
(3)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, North Carolina State 
University College of Veterinary Medicine; cmtherio@ncsu.edu.

Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic, gram-positive, spore-forming enteric 
pathogen that is associated with increasing morbidity and mortality and 
consequently poses an urgent threat to public health. Recurrence of a C. 
difficile infection (CDI) after successful treatment with antibiotics is high, 
occurring in 20-30% of patients, thus necessitating the discovery of novel 
therapeutics against this pathogen. Current animal models of CDI result in high 
mortality rates and thus do not approximate the chronic, insidious disease 
manifestations seen in humans with CDI. To evaluate therapeutics against C. 
difficile, a mouse model approximating human disease utilizing a 
clinically-relevant strain is needed. This protocol outlines the cefoperazone 
mouse model of CDI using a clinically-relevant and genetically-tractable strain, 
R20291. Techniques for clinical disease monitoring, C. difficile bacterial 
enumeration, toxin cytotoxicity, and histopathological changes throughout CDI in 
a mouse model are detailed in the protocol. Compared to other mouse models of 
CDI, this model is not uniformly lethal at the dose administered, allowing for 
the observation of a prolonged clinical course of infection concordant with the 
human disease. Therefore, this cefoperazone mouse model of CDI proves a valuable 
experimental platform to assess the effects of novel therapeutics on the 
amelioration of clinical disease and on the restoration of colonization 
resistance against C. difficile.

DOI: 10.3791/54850
PMCID: PMC5226375
PMID: 28060346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2020 May;67(3):1295-1305. doi: 10.1111/tbed.13470. Epub 
2020 Jan 13.

Wild griffon vultures (Gyps fulvus) fed at supplementary feeding stations: 
Potential carriers of pig pathogens and pig-derived antimicrobial resistance?

Sevilla E(1), Marín C(2), Delgado-Blas JF(3), González-Zorn B(3), Vega S(2), 
Kuijper E(4), Bolea R(1), Mainar-Jaime RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Dpto. de Patología Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Instituto Agroalimentario 
de Aragón - IA2 - (Universidad de Zaragoza-CITA), Zaragoza, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad CEU Cardenal Herrera, CEU 
Universities, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Dpto. de Sanidad Animal y Centro de Vigilancia Sanitaria Veterinaria 
(VISAVET), Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)Dpt. of Medical Microbiology, Centre of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The carriage of two important pathogens of pigs, that is enterotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli (ETEC) and Clostridioides difficile, was investigated in 104 
cloacal samples from wild griffon vultures (Gyps fulvus) fed on pig carcasses at 
supplementary feeding stations (SFS), along with their level of antimicrobial 
resistance (AMR). E. coli was isolated from 90 (86.5%) samples, but no ETEC was 
detected, likely because ETEC fimbriae confer the species specificity of the 
pathogen. Resistance to at least one antimicrobial agent was detected in 89.9% 
of E. coli isolates, with AMR levels being extremely high (>70%) for 
tetracycline and streptomycin and very high (>50%) for ampicillin and 
sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim. Resistance to other critically important 
antimicrobials such as colistin and extended-spectrum cephalosporins was 2.2% 
and 1.1%, respectively, and was encoded by the mcr-1 and blaSHV-12 genes. 
Multidrug resistance was displayed by 80% of the resistant E. coli, and 
blaSHV-12 gene shared plasmid with other AMR genes. In general, resistance 
patterns in E. coli from vultures mirrored those found in pigs. Clostridioides 
difficile was detected in three samples (2.9%); two of them belonged to PCR 
ribotype 078 and one to PCR ribotype 126, both commonly found in pigs. All 
C. difficile isolates were characterized by a moderate-to-high level of 
resistance to fluoroquinolones and macrolides but susceptible to metronidazole 
or vancomycin, similar to what is usually found in C. difficile isolates from 
pigs. Thus, vultures may contribute somewhat to the environmental dissemination 
of some pig pathogens through their acquisition from pig carcasses and, more 
importantly, of AMR for antibiotics of critical importance for humans. However, 
the role of vultures would likely be much lesser than that of disposing pig 
carcasses at the SFS. The monitoring of AMR, and particularly of 
colistin-resistant and ESBL-producing E. coli, should be considered in pig farms 
used as sources of carcasses for SFS.

© 2020 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.13470
PMID: 31901154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Infect Immun. 2018 Apr 23;86(5):e00943-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00943-17. Print 2018 
May.

Type IV Pili Promote Clostridium difficile Adherence and Persistence in a Mouse 
Model of Infection.

McKee RW(1), Aleksanyan N(1), Garrett EM(1), Tamayo R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA Rita_tamayo@med.unc.edu.

Cyclic diguanylate (c-di-GMP) is a second messenger that regulates the 
transition from motile to sessile lifestyles in numerous bacteria and controls 
virulence factor production in a variety of pathogens. In Clostridium difficile, 
c-di-GMP negatively regulates flagellum biosynthesis and swimming motility and 
promotes the production of type IV pili (TFP), biofilm formation, and surface 
motility in vitro Flagella have been identified as colonization factors in C. 
difficile, but the role of TFP in adherence to host cells and in colonization of 
the mammalian gut is unknown. Here we show that c-di-GMP promotes adherence to 
epithelial cells in vitro, which can be partly attributed to the loss of 
flagella. Using TFP-null mutants, we demonstrate that adherence to epithelial 
cells is partially mediated by TFP and that this TFP-mediated adherence requires 
c-di-GMP regulation. In a mouse model of colonization, the TFP-null mutants 
initially colonized the intestine as well as the parental strain but were 
cleared more quickly. Moreover, compared to the parent strain, C. difficile 
strains lacking TFP were particularly deficient in association with the cecal 
mucosa. Together these data indicate that TFP and their positive regulation by 
c-di-GMP promote attachment of C. difficile to the intestinal epithelium and 
contribute to persistence of C. difficile in the host intestine.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00943-17
PMCID: PMC5913833
PMID: 29483294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res. 2018 Dec;1865(12):1945-1958. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2018.10.007. Epub 2018 Oct 6.

Clostridium difficile toxin B induces senescence in enteric glial cells: A 
potential new mechanism of Clostridium difficile pathogenesis.

Fettucciari K(1), Macchioni L(2), Davidescu M(2), Scarpelli P(2), Palumbo C(3), 
Corazzi L(2), Marchegiani A(4), Cerquetella M(4), Spaterna A(4), Marconi P(2), 
Bassotti G(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia Medical School, 
Perugia, Italy. Electronic address: katia.fettucciari@unipg.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia Medical School, 
Perugia, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, Tor Vergata 
University, Rome, Italy.
(4)School of Biosciences and Veterinary Medicine, University of Camerino, 
Macerata, Italy.
(5)Department of Medicine, University of Perugia Medical School, Perugia, Italy; 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology Section, Santa Maria della Misericordia 
Hospital, Perugia, Italy.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) causes nosocomial/antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis, with dramatic incidence/mortality 
worldwide. C. difficile virulence factors are toxin A and toxin B (TcdB) which 
cause cytopathic/cytotoxic effects and inflammation. Until now studies were 
focused on molecular effects of C. difficile toxins (Tcds) on different cells 
while unexplored aspect is the status/fate of cells that survived their 
cytotoxicity. Recently we demonstrated that enteric glial cells (EGCs) are 
susceptible to TcdB cytotoxicity, but several EGCs survived and were 
irreversibly cell-cycle arrested and metabolically active, suggesting that EGCs 
could became senescent. This is important because allowed us to evaluate the not 
explored status/fate of cells surviving Tcds cytotoxicity, and particularly if 
TcdB induces senescence in EGCs. Rat-transformed EGCs were treated with 10 ng/ml 
TcdB for 6 h-48 h, or for 48 h, followed by incubation for additional 4 or 
11 days in absence of TcdB (6 or 13 total days). Senescence markers/effectors 
were examined by specific assays. TcdB induces senescence in EGCs, as 
demonstrated by the senescence markers: irreversible cell-cycle arrest, 
senescence-associated-β‑galactosidase positivity, flat morphology, early and 
persistent DNA damage (ATM and H2AX phosphorylation), p27 overexpression, pRB 
hypophosphorylation, c‑Myc, cyclin B1, cdc2 and phosphorylated-cdc2 
downregulation, Sirtuin‑2 and Sirtuin‑3 overexpression. TcdB-induced EGC 
senescence is dependent by JNK and AKT activation but independent by ROS, p16 
and p53/p21 pathways. In conclusion, TcdB induces senescence in EGCs. The 
extrapolation of these results to CDI leads to hypothesize that EGCs that 
survived TcdB, once they have acquired a senescence state, could cause irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and tumors due to 
persistent inflammation, transfer of senescence status and stimulation of 
pre-neoplastic cells.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2018.10.007
PMID: 30296499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Infect Immun. 2018 Oct 25;86(11):e00489-18. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00489-18. Print 
2018 Nov.

Oral Immunization with Nontoxigenic Clostridium difficile Strains Expressing 
Chimeric Fragments of TcdA and TcdB Elicits Protective Immunity against C. 
difficile Infection in Both Mice and Hamsters.

Wang Y(1), Wang S(1), Bouillaut L(2), Li C(1), Duan Z(1)(3), Zhang K(4), Ju 
X(5), Tzipori S(6), Sonenshein AL(2), Sun X(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani School of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of 
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Shanxi Agricultural University, Taigu, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National Foot and 
Mouth Disease Reference Laboratory, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China.
(5)Department of Veterinary Medicine, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, 
China.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases and Global Health, Tufts University 
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani School of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA sun5@health.usf.edu.

The symptoms of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) are attributed largely to 
two C. difficile toxins, TcdA and TcdB. Significant efforts have been devoted to 
developing vaccines targeting both toxins through parenteral immunization 
routes. However, C. difficile is an enteric pathogen, and mucosal/oral 
immunization would be particularly useful to protect the host against CDI, 
considering that the gut is the main site of disease onset and progression. 
Moreover, vaccines directed only against toxins do not target the cells and 
spores that transmit the disease. Previously, we constructed a chimeric vaccine 
candidate, mTcd138, comprised of the glucosyltransferase and cysteine proteinase 
domains of TcdB and the receptor binding domain of TcdA. In this study, to 
develop an oral vaccine that can target both C. difficile toxins and 
colonization/adhesion factors, we expressed mTcd138 in a nontoxigenic C. 
difficile (NTCD) strain, resulting in strain NTCD_mTcd138. Oral immunization 
with spores of NTCD_mTcd138 provided mice full protection against infection with 
a hypervirulent C. difficile strain, UK6 (ribotype 027). The protective strength 
and efficacy of NTCD_mTcd138 were further evaluated in the acute CDI hamster 
model. Oral immunization with spores of NTCD_mTcd138 also provided hamsters 
significant protection against infection with 2 × 104 UK6 spores, a dose 
200-fold higher than the lethal dose of UK6 in hamsters. These results imply 
that the genetically modified, nontoxigenic C. difficile strain expressing 
mTcd138 may represent a novel mucosal vaccine candidate against CDI.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00489-18
PMCID: PMC6204701
PMID: 30150259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Mar 27;63(4):e01904-18. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.01904-18. Print 2019 Apr.

Pharmacological, Toxicological, and Dose Range Assessment of OG716, a Novel 
Lantibiotic for the Treatment of Clostridium difficile-Associated Infection.

Pulse ME(1), Weiss WJ(1), Kers JA(2), DeFusco AW(3), Park JH(3), Handfield M(4).

Author information:
(1)PreClinical Services, UNT System College of Pharmacy, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.
(2)Intrexon Corp., Industrial Products Division, South San Francisco, 
California, USA.
(3)Oragenics, Inc., Alachua, Florida, USA.
(4)Oragenics, Inc., Alachua, Florida, USA mhandfield@oragenics.com.

Lantibiotics present an attractive scaffold for the development of novel 
antibiotics. We report here a novel lantibiotic for the treatment of Clostridium 
difficile infection. The lead compounds were selected from a library of over 700 
single- and multiple-substitution variants of the lantibiotic mutacin 1140 
(MU1140). The best performers in vitro and in vivo were further used to 
challenge Golden Syrian hamsters orally in a Golden Syrian hamster model of 
Clostridium difficile-associated disease (CDAD) in a dose-response format, 
resulting in the selection of OG716 as the lead compound. This lantibiotic was 
characterized by a 50% effective dose of 23.85 mg/kg of body weight/day (10.97 
μmol/kg/day) in this model. Upon oral administration of the maximum feasible 
dose (≥1,918 mg/kg/day), no observable toxicities or side effects were noted, 
and no effect on intestinal motility was observed. Compartmentalization to the 
gastrointestinal tract was confirmed. MU1140-derived variants offer a large 
pipeline for the development of novel antibiotics for the treatment of several 
indications and are particularly attractive considering their novel mechanism of 
action. Based on the currently available data, OG716 has an acceptable profile 
for further development for the treatment of CDAD.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01904-18
PMCID: PMC6437525
PMID: 30670434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2011 Mar;41(2):287-309. doi: 
10.1016/j.cvsm.2010.12.005.

Bacterial enteritis in dogs and cats: diagnosis, therapy, and zoonotic 
potential.

Weese JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Centre for Public Health and Zoonoses, Ontario 
Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G2W1, Canada. 
jsweese@uoguelph.ca

A variety of bacteria are known or suspected of being able to cause enteritis in 
dogs and cats. Campylobacter spp, Clostridium difficile, Clostridium 
perfringens, and Salmonella spp are most commonly implicated, but many other 
organisms are likely involved. Poor understanding of the intestinal microflora 
and the fact that many, if not all, of these microorganisms can also be found in 
healthy individuals complicates testing, thereby affecting the use of specific 
treatments and assessment of potential infection control and zoonotic disease 
risks. An understanding of the strengths and limitations of various diagnostic 
options is important for the management of canine and feline enteritis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cvsm.2010.12.005
PMID: 21486637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Infect Immun. 2015 Nov;83(11):4383-91. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00145-15. Epub 2015 Aug 
31.

Analysis of Bacterial Communities during Clostridium difficile Infection in the 
Mouse.

Semenyuk EG(1), Poroyko VA(2), Johnston PF(3), Jones SE(1), Knight KL(1), 
Gerding DN(4), Driks A(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Stritch 
School of Medicine, Maywood, Illinois, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Stritch 
School of Medicine, Maywood, Illinois, USA Hines Veterans Affairs Hospital, 
Hines, Illinois, USA.
(4)Hines Veterans Affairs Hospital, Hines, Illinois, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Stritch 
School of Medicine, Maywood, Illinois, USA adriks@lumc.edu.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major cause of health care-associated 
disease. CDI initiates with ingestion of C. difficile spores, germination in the 
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and then colonization of the large intestine. The 
interactions between C. difficile cells and other bacteria and with host mucosa 
during CDI remain poorly understood. Here, we addressed the hypothesis that, in 
a mouse model of CDI, C. difficile resides in multicellular communities 
(biofilms) in association with host mucosa. To do this, we paraffin embedded and 
then sectioned the GI tracts of infected mice at various days postinfection 
(p.i.). We then used fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with 16S rRNA 
probes targeting most bacteria as well as C. difficile specifically. The results 
revealed that C. difficile is present as a minority member of communities in the 
outer (loose) mucus layer, in the cecum and colon, starting at day 1 p.i. To 
generate FISH probes that identify bacteria within mucus-associated communities 
harboring C. difficile, we characterized bacterial populations in the infected 
mouse GI tract using 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis of bacterial DNA prepared 
from intestinal content. This analysis revealed the presence of genera of 
several families belonging to Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes. These data suggest 
that formation of multispecies communities associated with the mucus of the 
cecum and colon is an important early step in GI tract colonization. They raise 
the possibility that other bacterial species in these communities modulate the 
ability of C. difficile to successfully colonize and, thereby, cause disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00145-15
PMCID: PMC4598419
PMID: 26324536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2018 Nov 23;293(47):18040-18054. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.004273. 
Epub 2018 Sep 28.

N-Deacetylases required for muramic-δ-lactam production are involved in 
Clostridium difficile sporulation, germination, and heat resistance.

Coullon H(1), Rifflet A(2), Wheeler R(2), Janoir C(1), Boneca IG(2), Candela 
T(3).

Author information:
(1)From the EA4043 Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Université 
Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 92290 Châtenay-Malabry.
(2)the Institut Pasteur, Unité Biologie et Génétique de la Paroi Bactérienne, 
75724 Paris, and; INSERM, Équipe Avenir, 75015 Paris, France.
(3)From the EA4043 Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Université 
Paris-Sud, Université Paris-Saclay, 92290 Châtenay-Malabry,. Electronic address: 
Thomas.candela@u-psud.fr.

Spores are produced by many organisms as a survival mechanism activated in 
response to several environmental stresses. Bacterial spores are multilayered 
structures, one of which is a peptidoglycan layer called the cortex, containing 
muramic-δ-lactams that are synthesized by at least two bacterial enzymes, the 
muramoyl-l-alanine amidase CwlD and the N-deacetylase PdaA. This study focused 
on the spore cortex of Clostridium difficile, a Gram-positive, toxin-producing 
anaerobic bacterial pathogen that can colonize the human intestinal tract and is 
a leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Using ultra-HPLC coupled with 
high-resolution MS, here we found that the spore cortex of the C. difficile 
630Δerm strain differs from that of Bacillus subtilis Among these differences, 
the muramic-δ-lactams represented only 24% in C. difficile, compared with 50% in 
B. subtilis CD630_14300 and CD630_27190 were identified as genes encoding the C. 
difficile N-deacetylases PdaA1 and PdaA2, required for muramic-δ-lactam 
synthesis. In a pdaA1 mutant, only 0.4% of all muropeptides carried a 
muramic-δ-lactam modification, and muramic-δ-lactams were absent in the cortex 
of a pdaA1-pdaA2 double mutant. Of note, the pdaA1 mutant exhibited decreased 
sporulation, altered germination, decreased heat resistance, and delayed 
virulence in a hamster infection model. These results suggest a much greater 
role for muramic-δ-lactams in C. difficile than in other bacteria, including B. 
subtilis In summary, the spore cortex of C. difficile contains lower levels of 
muramic-δ-lactams than that of B. subtilis, and PdaA1 is the major N-deacetylase 
for muramic-δ-lactam biosynthesis in C. difficile, contributing to sporulation, 
heat resistance, and virulence.

© 2018 Coullon et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA118.004273
PMCID: PMC6254358
PMID: 30266804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest with the contents of this article


88. Mol Cell Probes. 2016 Oct;30(5):306-311. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2016.08.010. Epub 
2016 Aug 26.

Molecular characteristics of Clostridium difficile isolates from human and 
animals in the North Eastern region of India.

Hussain I(1), Borah P(2), Sharma RK(3), Rajkhowa S(4), Rupnik M(5), Saikia 
DP(6), Hasin D(7), Hussain I(6), Deka NK(6), Barkalita LM(6), Nishikawa Y(8), 
Ramamurthy T(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Veterinary Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Veterinary 
Science & A.H. (FVSc & AH), SKUAST-Kashmir, Srinagar, 190006, J&K, India. 
Electronic address: isfaqhussain@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science (CVSc), Assam 
Agricultural University (AAU), Khanapara, Guwahati, 22, Assam, India; Department 
of Animal Biotechnology, CVSc, AAU, Khanapara, Guwahati, 22, Assam, India.
(3)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Science (CVSc), Assam 
Agricultural University (AAU), Khanapara, Guwahati, 22, Assam, India.
(4)National Research Centre on Pig, ICAR, Rani, Guwahati, 31, Assam, India.
(5)National Laboratory for Health, Environment and Food, Maribor, Slovenia; 
University of Maribor, Faculty of Medicine, Maribor, Slovenia; Centre of 
Excellence for Integrated Approaches in Chemistry and Biology of Proteins, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(6)Department of Animal Biotechnology, CVSc, AAU, Khanapara, Guwahati, 22, 
Assam, India.
(7)Division of Veterinary Physiology, FVSc & AH, SKUAST-Kashmir, Srinagar, 
190006, India.
(8)Department of Food and Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of Human Life 
Science, Osaka City University, Osaka, 558-8585, Japan.
(9)National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Disease, Beleghata, Kolkata, 700 
010, India.

A total of 1034 samples were collected from different sources and C. difficile 
was isolated from 18 (9.04%) of 199 human, 9 (4.89%) of 184 cattle, 29 (12.44%) 
of 233 pig, and from 23 (13.94%) of 165 poultry samples. Variations were 
observed on the rate of isolation according to age and clinical conditions 
(diarrhoea). None of the samples from cow, sheep, goat, local chicken, and wild 
animals yielded any C. difficile. Out of those isolates, 8, 2, 19 and 6 isolates 
from human, cattle, pig and poultry, respectively were toxigenic. The toxigenic 
isolates carried both tcdA, and tcdB (A+B+) and most of the human and the pig 
isolates were also positive for binary toxin genes (cdtA and cdtB). The A+B+ 
isolates belonged to three different toxinotypes (0, VI and XXXIII). Human and 
pig A+B+ isolates belonged to three (045, 126 and ACD 019) and four (046, 087, 
126 and ACD 011) different ribotypes, respectively and the ribotypes of two 
cattle isolates were 014 and ACD 010. Six A+B+ avian isolates belonged to six 
different ribotypes (014, 087, SLO 134, SLO 160, ACD 012, ACD 014). The 
non-toxigenic isolates from human, cattle, pig and poultry were grouped into 7, 
4, 4 and 7 different ribotypes, respectively. PFGE analysis could not 
differentiate similar ribotypes/toxinotypes of toxigenic isolates. All the 
toxigenic isolates showed cytopathic effect on Vero and Hela cell monolayers at 
1:100 dilutions of cell-free culture supernatants within 18-20 h of inoculation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcp.2016.08.010
PMID: 27569848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Hosp Infect. 2017 Oct;97(2):140-145. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2017.05.023. Epub 
2017 Jun 1.

Identifying environmental reservoirs of Clostridium difficile with a scent 
detection dog: preliminary evaluation.

Bryce E(1), Zurberg T(2), Zurberg M(2), Shajari S(2), Roscoe D(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, Vancouver Coastal 
Health, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. Electronic address: 
Elizabeth.Bryce@vch.ca.
(2)Patient Quality and Safety, Vancouver Coastal Health, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(3)Division of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, Vancouver Coastal 
Health, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Prompted by an article describing a dog trained to detect 
Clostridium difficile in patients, our institution evaluated a dog's ability to 
detect C. difficile scent from equipment and surfaces to assist in strategic 
deployment of adjunctive cleaning measures.
METHODS: An expert in drug and explosives scent dog handling trained a canine to 
identify odours from pure cultures and/or faecal specimens positive for 
C. difficile. Methods used to assess explosive and drug detection dogs were 
adapted and included evaluation of (i) odour recognition, using containers 
positive and negative for the scent of C. difficile, and of (ii) search 
capability, on a simulation ward with hidden scents. After demonstration that 
the canine could accurately and reliably detect the scent of C. difficile, 
formal assessments of all clinical areas began.
FINDINGS: Odour recognition (N = 75 containers) had a sensitivity of 100% and 
specificity of 97%. Search capability was 80% sensitive and 92.9% specific after 
removal of results from one room where dog and trainer fatigue influenced 
performance. Both odour recognition and search capability had an overall 
sensitivity of 92.3% and specificity of 95.4%. The clinical unit sweeps over a 
period of five months revealed a sensitivity of 100% in alerting on positive 
quality control hides. These clinical unit sweeps also resulted in 83 alerts 
during 49 sweep days.
CONCLUSION: A dog can be trained to accurately and reliably detect C. difficile 
odour from environmental sources to guide the best deployment of adjunctive 
cleaning measures and can be successfully integrated into a quality infection 
control programme.

Copyright © 2017 The Healthcare Infection Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2017.05.023
PMID: 28579472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2018 Nov;67(5):513-519. doi: 10.1111/lam.13066. Epub 2018 
Sep 19.

Wild mice in and around the city of Utrecht, the Netherlands, are carriers of 
Clostridium difficile but not ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae, Salmonella spp. 
or MRSA.

Burt SA(1), Meijer K(1), Burggraaff P(1), Kamerich WS(1), Harmanus C(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Division of Environmental 
Epidemiology & Veterinary Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Mice in buildings are a hygiene hazard because they harbour several zoonoses and 
animal diseases. The aim of this study was to gather information on specific 
bacteria in house mice caught in the urban environment. Mice caught in snap 
traps during pest control activities were collected in and around the city of 
Utrecht, the Netherlands, during May-June 2014, October-November 2015 and 
September-November 2016. The gut contents were analysed for ESBL/AmpC-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae, Salmonella spp., and Clostridium difficile and the buccal 
cavities were swabbed for methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA). In total, 109 
house mice (Mus musculus) and 22 wood mice (Apodemus sylvaticus) were examined. 
One mouse was found positive for Enterobacter spp. Salmonella spp. and MRSA were 
not found. Of n = 80 mice, 35·0% carried C. difficile (ribotypes in descending 
order of frequency: 014/020, 258, 002, 005, 013, 056, 081 and two unknown 
ribotypes). In conclusion, mouse droppings are a hazard for transmission of C. 
difficile to humans and their environment.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study shows that mice in buildings 
can carry Clostridium difficile ribotypes that are associated with clinical 
disease in humans. Whether the mice are the source or whether they picked up 
these bacteria from the human environment has not been investigated. Either way, 
mouse droppings in the indoor environment are a hazard for transmission of C. 
difficile to humans.

© 2018 The Authors. Letters in Applied Microbiology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of The Society for Applied Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1111/lam.13066
PMID: 30144118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2013;365:299-314. doi: 10.1007/82_2012_237.

Clostridium difficile infection in humans and piglets: a 'One Health' 
opportunity.

Squire MM(1), Riley TV.

Author information:
(1)Microbiology and Immunology, School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The 
University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, Squirm02@student.uwa.edu.au.

Clostridium difficile causes infectious diarrhoea in humans and animals. It has 
been found in both diarrhoeal and non-diarrhoeal pigs, horses and cattle, 
suggesting a potential reservoir for human insection, and in 20-40 % of meat 
products in Canada and the USA, suggesting the possibility, albeit not proven, 
of food-borne transmission. Although it is not yet completely clear, it is 
likely that excessive antimicrobial exposure is driving the establishment of C. 
difficile in animals, in a manner analogous to human infection, rather than the 
organism just being normal flora of the animal gastrointestinal tract. PCR 
ribotype 078 is the most common ribotype of C. difficile found in pigs (83 % in 
one study in the USA) and cattle (up to 100 %) and this ribotype is now the 
third most common ribotype of C. difficile found in human infection in Europe. 
Human and pig strains of C. difficile are genetically identical in Europe 
confirming that a zoonosis exists. Rates of community-acquired C. difficile 
infection (CDI) are increasing world wide, a fact that sits well with the notion 
that animals are a reservoir for human infection. Thus, there are three problems 
that require resolution: a human health issue, an animal health issue and the 
factor common to both these problems, environmental contamination. To 
successfully deal with these recent changes in the epidemiology of CDI will 
require a 'one health' approach involving human health physicians, veterinarians 
and environmental scientists.

DOI: 10.1007/82_2012_237
PMID: 22695920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Vet Microbiol. 2008 May 25;129(1-2):209-14. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.11.013. 
Epub 2007 Nov 22.

Prevalence and risk factors for Clostridium difficile colonization in dogs and 
cats hospitalized in an intensive care unit.

Clooten J(1), Kruth S, Arroyo L, Weese JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G 2W1, Canada.

Clostridium difficile is the most common cause of hospital- and 
antimicrobial-associated diarrhea in hospitalized humans however the role of C. 
difficile in diarrhea in dogs has not been defined. A prospective study of C. 
difficile colonization in dogs and cats was conducted in a veterinary teaching 
hospital intensive care unit (ICU). Rectal swabs were taken from patients upon 
admission to the ICU and every third day of hospitalization until discharge or 
death. C. difficile was isolated from 73/402 (18%) animals; 69% of isolates were 
toxigenic. Community-associated colonization was identified in 39/366 (11%) of 
animals that were sampled at the time of admission, while C. difficile was 
subsequently isolated from 27 of the remaining 327 (8.3%) animals that had a 
negative admission swab. C. difficile was isolated from seven other dogs during 
hospitalization, but the origin was unclear because the admission swab was not 
collected. Administration of antimicrobials prior to admission and 
administration of immunosuppressive drugs during hospitalization were risk 
factors for hospital-associated colonization (P=0.006, OR 4.05, 95% CI 
1.4-10.8). Acquisition of C. difficile during hospitalization in the ICU was 
associated with the development of diarrhea (P=0.004). Two ribotypes, one 
toxigenic and one non-toxigenic, predominated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.11.013
PMID: 18164560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. mBio. 2019 Mar 12;10(2):e02790-18. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02790-18.

A Role for Tetracycline Selection in Recent Evolution of Agriculture-Associated 
Clostridium difficile PCR Ribotype 078.

Dingle KE(1)(2)(3), Didelot X(4), Quan TP(5)(2)(3), Eyre DW(5)(2), Stoesser 
N(5)(2), Marwick CA(6), Coia J(7), Brown D(7), Buchanan S(8), Ijaz UZ(8), 
Goswami C(8), Douce G(8), Fawley WN(9), Wilcox MH(9), Peto TEA(5)(2)(3), Walker 
AS(5)(2)(3), Crook DW(5)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom kate.dingle@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(2)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical Research 
Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)NIHR Oxford Health Protection Research Unit on Healthcare Associated 
Infection and Antimicrobial Resistance, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford 
University, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(4)School of Life Sciences and Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, 
Coventry, United Kingdom.
(5)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, University 
of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(6)Population Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Dundee, 
Scotland, United Kingdom.
(7)Scottish Microbiology Reference Laboratories, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(8)University of Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds Teaching 
Hospitals, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom.

The increasing clinical importance of human infections (frequently severe) 
caused by Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 (RT078) was first reported in 
2008. The severity of symptoms (mortality of ≤30%) and the higher proportion of 
infections among community and younger patients raised concerns. Farm animals, 
especially pigs, have been identified as RT078 reservoirs. We aimed to 
understand the recent changes in RT078 epidemiology by investigating a possible 
role for antimicrobial selection in its recent evolutionary history. 
Phylogenetic analysis of international RT078 genomes (isolates from 2006 to 
2014, n = 400), using time-scaled, recombination-corrected, maximum likelihood 
phylogenies, revealed several recent clonal expansions. A common ancestor of 
each expansion had independently acquired a different allele of the tetracycline 
resistance gene tetM Consequently, an unusually high proportion (76.5%) of RT078 
genomes were tetM positive. Multiple additional tetracycline resistance 
determinants were also identified (including efflux pump tet40), frequently 
sharing a high level of nucleotide sequence identity (up to 100%) with sequences 
found in the pig pathogen Streptococcus suis and in other zoonotic pathogens 
such as Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli Each RT078 tetM clonal 
expansion lacked geographic structure, indicating rapid, recent international 
spread. Resistance determinants for C. difficile infection-triggering 
antimicrobials, including fluoroquinolones and clindamycin, were comparatively 
rare in RT078. Tetracyclines are used intensively in agriculture; this selective 
pressure, plus rapid, international spread via the food chain, may explain the 
increased RT078 prevalence in humans. Our work indicates that the use of 
antimicrobials outside the health care environment has selected for resistant 
organisms, and in the case of RT078, has contributed to the emergence of a human 
pathogen.IMPORTANCE Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 (RT078) has multiple 
reservoirs; many are agricultural. Since 2005, this genotype has been 
increasingly associated with human infections in both clinical settings and the 
community. Investigations of RT078 whole-genome sequences revealed that 
tetracycline resistance had been acquired on multiple independent occasions. 
Phylogenetic analysis revealed a rapid, recent increase in numbers of closely 
related tetracycline-resistant RT078 (clonal expansions), suggesting that 
tetracycline selection has strongly influenced its recent evolutionary history. 
We demonstrate recent international spread of emergent, tetracycline-resistant 
RT078. A similar tetracycline-positive clonal expansion was also identified in 
unrelated nontoxigenic C. difficile, suggesting that this process may be 
widespread and may be independent of disease-causing ability. Resistance to 
typical C. difficile infection-associated antimicrobials (e.g., 
fluoroquinolones, clindamycin) occurred only sporadically within RT078. 
Selective pressure from tetracycline appears to be a key factor in the emergence 
of this human pathogen and the rapid international dissemination that followed, 
plausibly via the food chain.

Copyright © 2019 Dingle et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02790-18
PMCID: PMC6414706
PMID: 30862754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Iran J Vet Res. 2016 Fall;17(4):273-276.

Isolation of Clostridium difficile and molecular detection of binary and A/B 
toxins in faeces of dogs.

Ghavidel M(1), Salari Sedigh H(2), Razmyar J(2).

Author information:
(1)Ph.D. Student in Bacteriology, Department of Microbiology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ferdowsi 
University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran.

The aim of this study was to isolate Clostridium difficile from dogs' faeces, 
and to study the frequency of its virulence genes. A total of 151 samples of 
dogs' faeces were collected. The isolation of C. difficile was performed by 
using the bacterial culture methods followed by DNA extraction using boiling 
method. Multiplex PCR method was performed for identification of tcdA, tcdB, 
cdtA and cdtB genes and single method was carried out for detection of tcdC. 
Twelve samples (7.9%) were positive in bacteriological assay and based on 
molecular assay, 66.7% of the isolates (8 of 12 C. difficile isolated) had shown 
tcdA+, tcdB+ profile. This is the first investigation on molecular assay of C. 
difficile in Iran's dog population.

PMCID: PMC5309461
PMID: 28224013


95. PLoS One. 2016 Jul 28;11(7):e0160107. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160107. 
eCollection 2016.

Importance of Glutamate Dehydrogenase (GDH) in Clostridium difficile 
Colonization In Vivo.

Girinathan BP(1), Braun S(1), Sirigireddy AR(1), Lopez JE(1), Govind R(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, 66502, 
United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016 Oct 21;11(10 ):e0165579.

Clostridium difficile is the principal cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. 
Major metabolic requirements for colonization and expansion of C. difficile 
after microbiota disturbance have not been fully determined. In this study, we 
show that glutamate utilization is important for C. difficile to establish 
itself in the animal gut. When the gluD gene, which codes for glutamate 
dehydrogenase (GDH), was disrupted, the mutant C. difficile was unable to 
colonize and cause disease in a hamster model. Further, from the complementation 
experiment it appears that extracellular GDH may be playing a role in promoting 
C. difficile colonization and disease progression. Quantification of free amino 
acids in the hamster gut during C. difficile infection showed that glutamate is 
among preferred amino acids utilized by C. difficile during its expansion. This 
study provides evidence of the importance of glutamate metabolism for C. 
difficile pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0160107
PMCID: PMC4965041
PMID: 27467167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


96. Int J Med Microbiol. 2018 Oct;308(7):770-775. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2018.05.006. 
Epub 2018 May 29.

The emergence of Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 in piglets in the Czech 
Republic clusters with Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 isolates from 
Germany, Japan and Taiwan.

Krutova M(1), Zouharova M(2), Matejkova J(3), Tkadlec J(3), Krejčí J(2), Faldyna 
M(2), Nyc O(3), Bernardy J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Czech Republic. Electronic 
address: marcela.krutova@lfmotol.cuni.cz.
(2)Veterinary Research Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University in Prague and Motol University Hospital, Czech Republic.

Clostridium difficile is a major nosocomial pathogen in humans with an 
increasing incidence in the community. The "one-health" approach of research is 
needed to investigate possible reservoirs of C. difficile and route of its 
transmission. The objective of this study is to investigate the occurrence of C. 
difficile in pigs in the Czech Republic with characterisation of the isolates to 
determine their genetic relatedness to C. difficile isolates from European and 
Asian pigs. A total of 198 pig faeces samples from 23 farms were investigated 
and of those 57 samples (55 piglets, 2 sows) from 11 farms were confirmed as C. 
difficile positive. The majority of C. difficile isolates belonged to the 
sequence type 11 and clade 5. The predominant ribotypes were 078 (n = 23), 
078-variant (n = 5), 033 (n = 10) followed by RTs 150 (n = 7), 011 (n = 5), 045 
(n = 4), 126, 014, 002 (n = 1, each). All isolates were susceptible to 
metronidazole, vancomycin and tetracycline. Isolates of RTs 150 and 078-variant 
were moxifloxacin resistant (MIC≥32 mg/L) and carried the amino acid 
substitution Thr82Ile in the GyrA. A multi-locus variable number tandem-repeats 
analysis (MLVA) revealed a clonal relatedness of isolates within individual 
farms and in C. difficile RT078 isolates between two Czech farms. Czech C. 
difficile RT078 isolates clustered with German C. difficile RT078 isolates and 
Czech C. difficile 078-variant isolates clustered with C. difficile RT078 
isolates from Japan and Taiwan. This study found an emergence of C. difficile 
RT078 in Czech piglets that was related genetically to C. difficile RT078 
isolates from Germany, Japan and Taiwan.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2018.05.006
PMID: 29859665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Anaerobe. 2016 Aug;40:5-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.04.012. Epub 2016 Apr 
20.

Determination of the extent of Clostridium difficile colonisation and toxin 
accumulation in sows and neonatal piglets.

Grześkowiak Ł(1), Zentek J(2), Vahjen W(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Freie Universität Berlin, Königin-Luise 
Strasse 49, 14195, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: 
lukasz.grzeskowiak@fu-berlin.de.
(2)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Freie Universität Berlin, Königin-Luise 
Strasse 49, 14195, Berlin, Germany.

Clostridium difficile is an important spore-forming, opportunistic pathogen in 
animal husbandry and health care. In pig farming, only neonatal piglets are 
affected, and diarrhoea and necrotising lesions are common symptoms leading to 
dehydration and in some cases death. This study aimed at the assessment of the 
quantitative development of C. difficile colonisation in neonatal piglets by 
determining the shedding of spores and C. difficile toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB) 
concentrations in sow (n = 5-6) and piglet pen faeces (n = 5-6) at different 
time points. Spores were quantified on selective agar plates and toxins using 
ELISA method. C. difficile was not detected in the faeces of all but one sow 
during the perinatal period. Faeces of 2- and 4-day-old piglets contained 
0.65 log cells/g and 5.88 log cells/g of C. difficile, respectively. Toxins were 
detected on day 4 at a concentration of 2.13 log ng/g (TcdA) and 2.06 log ng/g 
(TcdB). On day 6, concentration of C. difficile reached 6.14 log CFU/g and 
toxins 2.02 log ng/g (TcdA) and 2.20 log ng/g (TcdB). Two-week-old piglets 
showed 4.72 log CFU/g of C. difficile but toxins could not be detected. At 21 
days of age, both C. difficile and toxins were undetectable. The concentration 
and the prevalence of C. difficile were positively associated with the 
prevalence of toxins in piglets. A very short time window for colonisation by C. 
difficile, including toxin-producing strains can be observed in neonatal 
piglets. The significance for animal health and the risk of a carrier status 
need to be addressed in future studies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.04.012
PMID: 27108595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Microbiol. 2019 Jun;111(6):1671-1688. doi: 10.1111/mmi.14245. Epub 2019 Apr 
2.

Role of the global regulator Rex in control of NAD(+) -regeneration in 
Clostridioides (Clostridium) difficile.

Bouillaut L(1), Dubois T(2)(3), Francis MB(4), Daou N(1), Monot M(2)(3), Sorg 
JA(4), Sonenshein AL(1), Dupuy B(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, 02111.
(2)Pathogenesis of Bacterial Anaerobes Laboratory, Institut Pasteur, 75724, 
Paris, France.
(3)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, 77843.

For the human pathogen Clostridioides (also known as Clostridium) difficile, the 
ability to adapt to nutrient availability is critical for its proliferation and 
production of toxins during infection. Synthesis of the toxins is regulated by 
the availability of certain carbon sources, fermentation products and amino 
acids (e.g. proline, cysteine, isoleucine, leucine and valine). The effect of 
proline is attributable at least in part to its role as an inducer and substrate 
of D-proline reductase (PR), a Stickland reaction that regenerates NAD+ from 
NADH. Many Clostridium spp. use Stickland metabolism (co-fermentation of pairs 
of amino acids) to generate ATP and NAD+ . Synthesis of PR is activated by PrdR, 
a proline-responsive regulatory protein. Here we report that PrdR, in the 
presence of proline, represses other NAD+ -generating pathways, such as the 
glycine reductase and succinate-acetyl CoA utilization pathways leading to 
butyrate production, but does so indirectly by affecting the activity of Rex, a 
global redox-sensing regulator that responds to the NAD+ /NADH ratio. Our 
results indicate that PR activity is the favored mechanism for NAD+ regeneration 
and that both Rex and PrdR influence toxin production. Using the hamster model 
of C. difficile infection, we revealed the importance of PrdR-regulated 
Stickland metabolism in the virulence of C. difficile.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/mmi.14245
PMCID: PMC6561804
PMID: 30882947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2014 Mar;352(2):140-9. doi: 10.1111/1574-6968.12367. Epub 
2014 Jan 7.

Small animal models for the study of Clostridium difficile disease pathogenesis.

Hutton ML(1), Mackin KE, Chakravorty A, Lyras D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of bacterial antibiotic-associated 
diarrhoea in hospitals in the developed world. Despite this notoriety, the 
complex mechanisms employed by this pathogen to overcome innate host defences 
and induce fulminant disease are poorly understood. Various animal models have 
been used extensively for C. difficile research to study disease pathogenesis. 
Until recently, the most commonly used C. difficile disease model has utilised 
hamsters; however, mouse and pig models have now been developed that unravel 
different aspects of C. difficile pathology. This review summarises key aspects 
of the small animal models currently used in C. difficile studies with a 
specific focus on major differences between them. Furthermore, this review 
highlights the advantages and disadvantages of each model and illustrates that 
careful consideration is required when selecting models for use in C. difficile 
research.

© 2013 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/1574-6968.12367
PMID: 24372713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Vet Microbiol. 2012 Nov 9;160(1-2):256-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.05.014. 
Epub 2012 May 18.

Vermin on pig farms are vectors for Clostridium difficile PCR ribotypes 078 and 
045.

Burt SA(1), Siemeling L, Kuijper EJ, Lipman LJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Risk Assessmant Sciences, Division of Veterinary Public Health, 
University of Utrecht, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands. s.a.burt@uu.nl

Clostridium difficile is a gram positive, spore forming, toxin producing, 
anaerobic bacteria and an opportunistic pathogen for Man and many animal 
species, causing diarrhea in young piglets. Piglets probably become colonized 
from the environment. To investigate the possible spread and transmission of C. 
difficile by vermin, vermin samples were collected on a pig farm in the 
Netherlands and investigated for the presence of C. difficile. Samples of house 
mice (n=53), drain flies (n=39), lesser houseflies (n=95), and yellow mealworms 
(n=11) were found positive for C. difficile in 66%, 97%, 56% and 100% of cases 
respectively. C. difficile PCR ribotype 078 was found in all categories of 
vermin and ribotype 045 was found in two samples from the skeletal muscle of 
mice. House sparrows found dead on the premises (n=35) and bird droppings (n=26) 
were also investigated and carried C. difficile in 66% and 4% of cases 
respectively. PCR ribotype 078 was identified in bird and droppings samples but 
ribotype 045 was not. We conclude that vermin can play a role in the spread and 
transmission of C. difficile types 078 and 045 within pig farms and to other 
locations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.05.014
PMID: 22682200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Front Microbiol. 2018 Jan 17;8:2635. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02635. eCollection 
2017.

Lauric Acid Is an Inhibitor of Clostridium difficile Growth in Vitro and Reduces 
Inflammation in a Mouse Infection Model.

Yang HT(1), Chen JW(1)(2), Rathod J(3), Jiang YZ(1), Tsai PJ(2)(4), Hung 
YP(5)(6)(7), Ko WC(5)(8)(9), Paredes-Sabja D(10), Huang IH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National 
Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Earth Sciences, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Tainan Hospital, Ministry of Health and 
Welfare, Tainan, Taiwan.
(7)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University 
Hospital, Tainan, Taiwan.
(8)Center of Infection Control, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, 
Taiwan.
(9)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, 
Tainan, Taiwan.
(10)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andrés Bello, 
Santiago, Chile.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive, spore-forming anaerobic human 
gastrointestinal pathogen. C. difficile infection (CDI) is a major health 
concern worldwide, with symptoms ranging from diarrhea to pseudomembranous 
colitis, toxic megacolon, sepsis, and death. CDI onset and progression are 
mostly caused by intestinal dysbiosis and exposure to C. difficile spores. 
Current treatment strategies include antibiotics; however, antibiotic use is 
often associated with high recurrence rates and an increased risk of antibiotic 
resistance. Medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) have been revealed to inhibit the 
growth of multiple human bacterial pathogens. Components of coconut oil, which 
include lauric acid, have been revealed to inhibit C. difficile growth in vitro. 
In this study, we demonstrated that lauric acid exhibits potent antimicrobial 
activities against multiple toxigenic C. difficile isolates in vitro. The 
inhibitory effect of lauric acid is partly due to reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
generation and cell membrane damage. The administration of lauric acid 
considerably reduced biofilm formation and preformed biofilms in a 
dose-dependent manner. Importantly, in a mouse infection model, lauric acid 
pretreatment reduced CDI symptoms and proinflammatory cytokine production. Our 
combined results suggest that the naturally occurring MCFA lauric acid is a 
novel C. difficile inhibitor and is useful in the development of an alternative 
or adjunctive treatment for CDI.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02635
PMCID: PMC5776096
PMID: 29387044


102. J Hazard Mater. 2018 Sep 5;357:53-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.05.066. Epub 
2018 May 29.

Dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes and human pathogenic bacteria from 
a pig feedlot to the surrounding stream and agricultural soils.

Fang H(1), Han L(1), Zhang H(1), Long Z(1), Cai L(2), Yu Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, College of Agriculture & 
Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(2)Division of Life Science, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Institute of Pesticide and Environmental Toxicology, College of Agriculture & 
Biotechnology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China. Electronic address: 
ylyu@zju.edu.cn.

The dissemination of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs), human pathogenic 
bacteria (HPB), and antibiotic-resistant HPB (ARHPB) from animal feedlot to 
nearby environment poses a potentially high risk to environmental ecology and 
public health. Here, a metagenomic analysis was employed to explore the 
dissemination of ARGs, HPB, and ARHPB from a pig feedlot to surrounding stream 
and agricultural soils. In total, not detectable (ND)-1,628.4 μg/kg of 
antibiotic residues, 18 types of ARGs, 48 HPB species, and 216 ARB isolates were 
detected in all samples. Antibiotic residues from pig feedlot mainly migrated 
into stream sediments and greenhouse soil. The dominant ARGs and HPB species 
from pig feedlot spread into stream sediments (tetracycline resistance genes, 
Clostridium difficile, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis), stream water (multidrug 
resistance (MDR) genes, Shigella flexneri, and Bordetella pertussis), and 
greenhouse soil (MDR genes, Bacillus anthracis, and Brucella melitensis). It is 
concerning that 54.4% of 216 ARB isolates from all samples were potential ARHPB 
species, and genome sequencing and functional annotation of 4 MDR HPB isolates 
showed 9 ARG types. Our findings revealed the potential migration and 
dissemination of antibiotic residues, ARGs, HPB, and ARHPB from pig feedlot to 
surrounding stream and agricultural soils via pig sewage discharge and manure 
fertilization.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.05.066
PMID: 29860105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Anaerobe. 2017 Feb;43:78-81. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.12.008. Epub 2016 Dec 
11.

Isolation of Clostridium difficile from dogs with digestive disorders, including 
stable metronidazole-resistant strains.

Orden C(1), Blanco JL(2), Álvarez-Pérez S(1), Garcia-Sancho M(3), 
Rodriguez-Franco F(3), Sainz A(3), Villaescusa A(3), Harmanus C(4), Kuijper 
E(4), Garcia ME(5).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Sanidad Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad 
Complutense, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Departamento de Sanidad Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad 
Complutense, 28040, Madrid, Spain; Hospital Clínico Veterinario Complutense, 
Universidad Complutense, 28040, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: 
jlblanco@ucm.es.
(3)Hospital Clínico Veterinario Complutense, Universidad Complutense, 28040, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Center of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Departamento de Sanidad Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad 
Complutense, 28040, Madrid, Spain; Hospital Clínico Veterinario Complutense, 
Universidad Complutense, 28040, Madrid, Spain.

The prevalence of Clostridium difficile in 107 dogs with diverse digestive 
disorders attended in a Spanish veterinary teaching hospital was assessed. The 
microorganism was isolated from 13 dogs (12.1%) of different disease groups. 
Isolates belonged to PCR ribotypes 078, 106, 154 and 430 (all of them toxigenic) 
and 110 (non-toxigenic), and were resistant to several antimicrobial drugs. 
Notably, seven isolates obtained from different dogs displayed stable resistance 
to metronidazole. The results of this study provide further evidence that dogs 
can act as a reservoir of C. difficile strains of epidemic ribotypes with 
resistance to multiple antibiotics.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.12.008
PMID: 27965048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Anaerobe. 2012 Dec;18(6):621-5. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2012.09.008. Epub 2012 
Oct 3.

Clostridium difficile in young farm animals and slaughter animals in Belgium.

Rodriguez C(1), Taminiau B, Van Broeck J, Avesani V, Delmée M, Daube G.

Author information:
(1)Food Science Department, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, 
B43bis, Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium. c.rodriguez@ulg.ac.be

Faecal carriage of Clostridium difficile in healthy animals has been reported 
recently, especially in piglets and calves. However there is limited data about 
carriage in animals just prior to slaughter in Europe. The main objective of 
this study was to determine the presence of C. difficile in pigs and cattle at 
the slaughterhouse. C. difficile was isolated in 6.9% of the cattle at the 
slaughterhouse. None of the pig slaughter samples were positive for C. difficile 
after an enrichment time of 72 h. For complementary data, a short study was 
conducted in piglets and calves at farms. C. difficile was more prevalent in 
piglets (78.3%) than in calves (22.2%) on the farms. Regarding the piglet 
samples, 27.8% of the positive samples were detected without enrichment of 
stools. The PCR ribotype 078 was predominant in farm animals. Samples isolated 
from slaughter cattle presented the widest range in PCR-ribotype variety, and 
the most prevalent PCR ribotype was 118a UCL. The results of this study confirm 
that C. difficile is present in slaughter animals in Belgium with a large 
percentage of toxigenic strains also commonly found in humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2012.09.008
PMID: 23041559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS Pathog. 2018 Aug 8;14(8):e1007199. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007199. 
eCollection 2018 Aug.

Clostridium difficile exosporium cysteine-rich proteins are essential for the 
morphogenesis of the exosporium layer, spore resistance, and affect C. difficile 
pathogenesis.

Calderón-Romero P(1)(2), Castro-Córdova P(1)(2), Reyes-Ramírez R(1)(2), 
Milano-Céspedes M(1), Guerrero-Araya E(1)(2), Pizarro-Guajardo M(1)(2), 
Olguín-Araneda V(1), Gil F(1)(2), Paredes-Sabja D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, 
Santiago, Chile.
(2)Millennium Nucleus in the Biology of the Intestinal Microbiota, Facultad de 
Ciencias de la Vida, Universidad Andrés Bello, Santiago, Chile.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive spore-former bacterium and the leading 
cause of nosocomial antibiotic-associated diarrhea that can culminate in fatal 
colitis. During the infection, C. difficile produces metabolically dormant 
spores, which persist in the host and can cause recurrence of the infection. The 
surface of C. difficile spores seems to be the key in spore-host interactions 
and persistence. The proteome of the outermost exosporium layer of C. difficile 
spores has been determined, identifying two cysteine-rich exosporium proteins, 
CdeC and CdeM. In this work, we explore the contribution of both cysteine-rich 
proteins in exosporium integrity, spore biology and pathogenesis. Using targeted 
mutagenesis coupled with transmission electron microscopy we demonstrate that 
both cysteine rich proteins, CdeC and CdeM, are morphogenetic factors of the 
exosporium layer of C. difficile spores. Notably, cdeC, but not cdeM spores, 
exhibited defective spore coat, and were more sensitive to ethanol, heat and 
phagocytic cells. In a healthy colonic mucosa (mouse ileal loop assay), cdeC and 
cdeM spore adherence was lower than that of wild-type spores; while in a mouse 
model of recurrence of the disease, cdeC mutant exhibited an increased infection 
and persistence during recurrence. In a competitive infection mouse model, cdeC 
mutant had increased fitness over wild-type. Through complementation analysis 
with FLAG fusion of known exosporium and coat proteins, we demonstrate that CdeC 
and CdeM are required for the recruitment of several exosporium proteins to the 
surface of C. difficile spores. CdeC appears to be conserved exclusively in 
related Peptostreptococcaeace family members, while CdeM is unique to C. 
difficile. Our results sheds light on how CdeC and CdeM affect the biology of C. 
difficile spores and the assembly of the exosporium layer and, demonstrate that 
CdeC affect C. difficile pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1007199
PMCID: PMC6101409
PMID: 30089172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


106. Int J Food Microbiol. 2013 Sep 2;166(2):256-62. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.07.017. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

Presence of Clostridium difficile in pigs and cattle intestinal contents and 
carcass contamination at the slaughterhouse in Belgium.

Rodriguez C(1), Avesani V, Van Broeck J, Taminiau B, Delmée M, Daube G.

Author information:
(1)Food Science Department, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, 
B43bis, Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium. c.rodriguez@ulg.ac.be

The objective of this study was to evaluate the presence of Clostridium 
difficile in intestinal and carcass samples collected from pigs and cattle at a 
single slaughterhouse. C. difficile was isolated in 1% and 9.9% of the pig and 
cattle intestinal contents and in 7.9% and 7% of cattle and pig carcass samples 
respectively. A total of 19 different PCR-ribotypes were identified, among them 
types 078 and 014. Seven of 19 ribotypes correlated with the PCR-ribotypes 
involved in human C. difficile infections in Belgium. This study confirms that 
animals are carriers of C. difficile at slaughter and ribotypes are identical 
than those in humans, and that carcass contamination occurs inside the 
slaughterhouse.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.07.017
PMID: 23973837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Int J Med Microbiol. 2016 Feb;306(2):115-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.02.002. 
Epub 2016 Feb 12.

Potentially hypervirulent Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 lineage 
isolates in pigs and possible implications for humans in Taiwan.

Wu YC(1), Lee JJ(2), Tsai BY(3), Liu YF(4), Chen CM(5), Tien N(6), Tsai PJ(7), 
Chen TH(8).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Institute of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No.250, Guoguang Rd., South Dist., 
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: pata0112@gmail.com.
(2)Graduate Institute of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No.250, Guoguang Rd., South Dist., 
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: frinlee@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, National Cheng Kung University, 
Medical College, No. 1, University Rd., Tainan 70101, Taiwan. Electronic 
address: anemoday@hotmail.com.
(4)Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Public Health, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No.250, Guoguang Rd., South Dist., 
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: kuraki0225@yahoo.com.tw.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Tungs' Taichung MetroHarbor Hospital, 
No.699, Sec. 8, Taiwan Blvd., Taichung 435, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
chioming2002@yahoo.com.tw.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, No.91 
Hsuehshih Rd., Taichung 404, Taiwan. Electronic address: t6719@mail.cmuh.org.tw.
(7)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, National Cheng 
Kung University, Medical College, No. 1, University Rd., Tainan 70101, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: peijtsai@mail.ncku.edu.com.
(8)Graduate Institute of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, National Chung Hsing University, No.250, Guoguang Rd., South Dist., 
Taichung 402, Taiwan. Electronic address: thc@dragon.nchu.edu.tw.

Clostridium difficile is a human and animal pathogen. Recently, the incidence of 
community-acquired C. difficile infection has increased, and many studies have 
indicated that C. difficile might be food-borne. The correlation between C. 
difficile infection in humans and in animals has been a topic of debate. The 
objective of this study was to determine the genetic relatedness of C. difficile 
from human and pigs in Taiwan. We investigated the molecular epidemiology of C. 
difficile in healthy humans and pigs from 2011 to 2015. The isolation rate of C. 
difficile from pigs in 13 commercial farms was 49% (100/204), and a high 
proportion of hypervirulent (C. difficile carrying tcdA, tcdB, and cdtA/B genes 
and a 39-bp deletion in the tcdC gene) ribotype 078 lineage isolates (90%, 
90/100; including 078, 126, 127, and 066-like isolates) were identified. In 
addition, the C. difficile ribotype 127 isolates from pigs typically exhibited 
moxifloxacin resistance (37/43; 86%). In healthy humans, the isolation rate was 
4.3% (3/69), and all healthy human isolates were non-toxigenic. In particular, 
we compared the porcine isolates with two patient strains (ribotype 127) 
obtained from two hospitals in central Taiwan. The multilocus variable number 
tandem repeat analysis revealed a high genetic relatedness between ribotype 127 
from patients and pigs. This study indicated that isolates of the ribotype 078 
lineage, and especially ribotype 127, were widely distributed in pig farms and 
showed a high frequency of moxifloxacin resistance. The closely related ribotype 
127 from patients and pigs may have had a common origin or low diversity. In 
conclusion, C. difficile ribotype 127 is a noteworthy pathogen in pigs and poses 
a potential public health threat.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijmm.2016.02.002
PMID: 26915500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Anaerobe. 2016 Feb;37:62-6. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.11.012. Epub 2015 Dec 
8.

Persistence of Clostridium difficile RT 237 infection in a Western Australian 
piggery.

Moono P(1), Putsathit P(1), Knight DR(1), Squire MM(1), Hampson DJ(2), Foster 
NF(3), Riley TV(4).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology & Immunology, School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The 
University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.
(2)School of Veterinary and Life Sciences, Murdoch University, Murdoch, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(3)Microbiology & Immunology, School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The 
University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia; 
Department of Microbiology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine (WA), Queen Elizabeth 
II Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.
(4)Microbiology & Immunology, School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The 
University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia; 
Department of Microbiology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine (WA), Queen Elizabeth 
II Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia. Electronic address: 
thomas.riley@uwa.edu.au.

Clostridium difficile is commonly associated with healthcare-related infections 
in humans, and is an emerging pathogen in food animal species. There is 
potential for transmission of C. difficile from animals or animal products to 
humans. This study aimed to determine if C. difficile RT 237 had persisted in a 
Western Australian piggery or if there had been a temporal change in 
C. difficile diversity. C. difficile carriage in litters with and without 
diarrhea was investigated, as was the acquisition of C. difficile over time 
using cohort surveys. Rectal swabs were obtained from piglets aged 1-10 days to 
determine prevalence of C. difficile carriage and samples were obtained from 20 
piglets on days 1, 7, 13, 20, and 42 of life to determine duration of shedding. 
Isolation of C. difficile from feces was achieved by selective enrichment 
culture. All isolates were characterized by standard molecular typing. 
Antimicrobial susceptibility testing was performed on selected isolates 
(n = 29). Diarrheic piglets were more likely to shed C. difficile than the 
non-diseased (p = 0.0124, χ2). In the cohort study, C. difficile was isolated 
from 40% samples on day 1, 50% on day 7, 20% on day 13, and 0% on days 20 and 
42. All isolates were RT 237 and no antimicrobial resistance was detected. The 
decline of shedding of C. difficile to zero has public health implications 
because slaughter age pigs have a low likelihood of spreading C. difficile to 
consumers via pig meat.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.11.012
PMID: 26679487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Sci Rep. 2018 Sep 17;8(1):13951. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-32390-6.

Novel Clade C-I Clostridium difficile strains escape diagnostic tests, differ in 
pathogenicity potential and carry toxins on extrachromosomal elements.

Ramírez-Vargas G(1), López-Ureña D(1), Badilla A(1), Orozco-Aguilar J(2), 
Murillo T(1), Rojas P(1), Riedel T(3)(4), Overmann J(3)(4), González G(5), 
Chaves-Olarte E(1), Quesada-Gómez C(1), Rodríguez C(6).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Tropical Diseases (CIET) and Faculty of Microbiology, 
University of Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica.
(2)Laboratory for Biological Assays (LEBi), University of Costa Rica, San José, 
Costa Rica.
(3)Leibniz Institute DSMZ-German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(4)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner-site 
Hannover-Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Research Center for Zoonosis Control, Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan.
(6)Research Center for Tropical Diseases (CIET) and Faculty of Microbiology, 
University of Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica. 
cesar.rodriguezsanchez@ucr.ac.cr.

The population structure of Clostridium difficile currently comprises eight 
major genomic clades. For the highly divergent C-I clade, only two toxigenic 
strains have been reported, which lack the tcdA and tcdC genes and carry a 
complete locus for the binary toxin (CDT) next to an atypical TcdB monotoxin 
pathogenicity locus (PaLoc). As part of a routine surveillance of C. difficile 
in stool samples from diarrheic human patients, we discovered three isolates 
that consistently gave negative results in a PCR-based screening for tcdC. 
Through phenotypic assays, whole-genome sequencing, experiments in cell 
cultures, and infection biomodels we show that these three isolates (i) escape 
common laboratory diagnostic procedures, (ii) represent new ribotypes, 
PFGE-types, and sequence types within the Clade C-I, (iii) carry chromosomal or 
plasmidal TcdBs that induce classical or variant cytopathic effects (CPE), and 
(iv) cause different levels of cytotoxicity and hamster mortality rates. These 
results show that new strains of C. difficile can be detected by more refined 
techniques and raise questions on the origin, evolution, and distribution of the 
toxin loci of C. difficile and the mechanisms by which this emerging pathogen 
causes disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-32390-6
PMCID: PMC6141592
PMID: 30224751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


110. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2017 Jun 28;27(6):1163-1170. doi: 
10.4014/jmb.1702.02041.

Clostridium difficile Toxin A Induces Reactive Oxygen Species Production and p38 
MAPK Activation to Exert Cellular Toxicity in Neuronal Cells.

Zhang P(1), Hong J(1), Yoon IN(1), Kang JK(2), Hwang JS(3), Kim H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin University, 
Pocheon 11159, Republic of Korea.
(2)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Incheon 21936, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Agricultural Biology, National Academy of Agricultural Science, 
RDA, Wanju 55365, Republic of Korea.

Clostridium difficile releases two exotoxins, toxin A and toxin B, which disrupt 
the epithelial cell barrier in the gut to increase mucosal permeability and 
trigger inflammation with severe diarrhea. Many studies have suggested that 
enteric nerves are also directly involved in the progression of this 
toxin-mediated inflammation and diarrhea. C. difficile toxin A is known to 
enhance neurotransmitter secretion, increase gut motility, and suppress 
sympathetic neurotransmission in the guinea pig colitis model. Although previous 
studies have examined the pathophysiological role of enteric nerves in gut 
inflammation, the direct effect of toxins on neuronal cells and the molecular 
mechanisms underlying toxin-induced neuronal stress remained to be unveiled. 
Here, we examined the toxicity of C. difficile toxin A against neuronal cells 
(SH-SY5Y). We found that toxin A treatment time- and dose-dependently decreased 
cell viability and triggered apoptosis accompanied by caspase-3 activation in 
this cell line. These effects were found to depend on the up-regulation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the subsequent activation of p38 MAPK and 
induction of p21Cip1/Waf1. Moreover, the N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC)-induced 
down-regulation of ROS could recover the viability loss and apoptosis of toxin 
A-treated neuronal cells. These results collectively suggest that C. difficile 
toxin A is toxic for neuronal cells, and that this is associated with rapid ROS 
generation and subsequent p38 MAPK activation and p21Cip1/Waf1 up-regulation. 
Moreover, our data suggest that NAC could inhibit the toxicity of C. difficile 
toxin A toward enteric neurons.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1702.02041
PMID: 28301919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Anaerobe. 2012 Oct;18(5):484-8. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2012.08.002. Epub 2012 
Aug 24.

Prevalence and distribution of Clostridium difficile PCR ribotypes in cats and 
dogs from animal shelters in Thuringia, Germany.

Schneeberg A(1), Rupnik M, Neubauer H, Seyboldt C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Bacterial Infections and Zoonoses at the Federal Research 
Institute for Animal Health-Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Naumburger Strasse 96a, 
07743 Jena, Germany. schneeberg.alexander@gmail.com

Clostridium difficile is an important cause of nosocomial diarrhoea in humans. 
Pet animals and livestock are discussed as potential natural reservoirs and 
sources of infection. In this study faecal samples from dogs and cats were 
collected at 10 animal shelters in Thuringia, Germany. C. difficile was isolated 
from 9 out of 165 (5.5%) canine and 5 out of 135 (3.7%) feline samples. Five PCR 
ribotypes (010, 014/020, 039, 045, SLO 066) were identified. PCR ribotypes 010 
and 014/020 were detected in more than one shelter and PCR ribotypes 014/020 and 
045 were isolated from dogs and cats. MLVA profiles of strains of a PCR ribotype 
from one shelter were identical or closely related, while strains of the same 
PCR ribotype from different shelters showed significant differences. This study 
shows that dogs and cats kept in animal shelters are a reservoir of C. difficile 
PCR ribotypes which can infect also humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2012.08.002
PMID: 22951303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(4):2387-92. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00021-14. Epub 
2014 Feb 10.

Kibdelomycin is a potent and selective agent against toxigenic Clostridium 
difficile.

Miesel L(1), Hecht DW, Osmolski JR, Gerding D, Flattery A, Li F, Lan J, Lipari 
P, Polishook JD, Liang L, Liu J, Olsen DB, Singh SB.

Author information:
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA.

Clostridium difficile is the causative agent of C. difficile-associated diarrhea 
(CDAD), with increased risk in elderly populations. Kibdelomycin, a novel 
natural-product inhibitor of type II topoisomerase enzymes, was evaluated for 
activity against C. difficile and gastrointestinal anaerobic organisms. 
Toxigenic C. difficile isolates (n=168) from U.S. hospitals and anaerobic 
Gram-positive and Gram-negative organisms (n=598) from Chicago-area hospitals 
were tested. Kibdelomycin showed potent activity against toxigenic C. difficile 
(MIC90=0.25 μg/ml) and most Gram-positive aerobic organisms but had little 
activity against Bacteroides species (MIC50>32 μg/ml; n=270). Potent anti-C. 
difficile activity was also observed in the hamster model of C. difficile 
colitis. Dosing at 1.6 mg/kg (twice-daily oral dose) resulted in protection from 
a lethal infection and a 2-log reduction in C. difficile cecal counts. A 
6.25-mg/kg twice-daily oral dose completely eliminated detectable C. difficile 
counts in cecal contents. A single 6.25-mg/kg oral dose showed that cecal 
contents were exposed to the drug at >2 μM (eightfold higher than the MIC), with 
no significant plasma exposure. These findings support further exploration of 
kibdelomycin for development of an anti-C. difficile agent.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00021-14
PMCID: PMC4023737
PMID: 24514098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Vet Intern Med. 2001 Jul-Aug;15(4):374-8.

The roles of Clostridium difficile and enterotoxigenic Clostridium perfringens 
in diarrhea in dogs.

Weese JS(1), Staempfli HR, Prescott JF, Kruth SA, Greenwood SJ, Weese HE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Canada. jsweese@uoguelph.ca

In this prospective study, feces of dogs with diarrhea were compared with feces 
of normal dogs for the presence of Clostridium difficile, C difficile toxins A 
and B, C perfringens, and C perfingens enterotoxin (CPE). C difficile toxins A, 
B, or both were present in feces of 18 of 87 (21%) dogs with diarrhea and 4 of 
55 (7%) normal dogs (P = 0.03), whereas CPE was present in the feces of 24 of 87 
(28%) dogs with diarrhea and 3 of 55 (5%) normal dogs (P = 0.01). C difficile 
was isolated from 2 of 87 (2%) dogs with diarrhea but was not isolated from the 
feces of 55 normal dogs, possibly because of poor survival of the organism in 
fecal samples. C perfringens was isolated from the feces of 23 of 24 (96%) 
CPE-positive dogs with diarrhea, 52 of 63 (83%) CPE-negative dogs with diarrhea, 
and 39 of 55 (71%) CPE-negative dogs with normal feces. No correlation was found 
between C perfringens spore number and the presence of CPE.

PMID: 11467596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Anaerobe. 2006 Feb;12(1):1-4. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2005.09.001. Epub 2005 Oct 
25.

Clostridium difficile: an important pathogen of food animals.

Songer JG(1), Anderson MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Science and Microbiology, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ 85721, USA. gsonger@u.arizona.edu

Human Clostridium difficile-associated disease (CDAD) is of unquestioned 
importance in humans, and has been a not-uncommon cause of enteric disease in 
horses, dogs, and ratites. Over the past 5 years, C. difficile has emerged as a 
major cause of neonatal enteritis in pigs. Piglets 1-7 days of age are affected, 
with gross lesions frequently including mesocolonic edema. Colonic contents may 
be pasty-to-watery and yellow, although some piglets are constipated or 
obstipated. Focal suppuration and segmental necrosis are seen on microscopic 
examination of cecal and colonic lamina propria, and exudation of neutrophils 
and fibrin into the lumen gives rise to the so-called volcano lesions. Results 
of one study revealed that more than one-third of piglets with enteritis were 
affected by C. difficile alone, while an additional quarter of affected piglets 
may have had mixed infections. C. difficile may be the most important 
uncontrolled cause of neonatal diarrhea in pigs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2005.09.001
PMID: 16701605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Vet Rec. 2015 Mar 7;176(10):253. doi: 10.1136/vr.102738. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin and Clostridium difficile toxin A/B do not 
play a role in acute haemorrhagic diarrhoea syndrome in dogs.

Busch K(1), Suchodolski JS(2), Kühner KA(1), Minamoto Y(2), Steiner JM(2), 
Mueller RS(1), Hartmann K(1), Unterer S(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Small Animal Medicine, LMU University of Munich, Veterinärstr. 13, 
Munich 80539, Germany.
(2)Gastrointestinal Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.

Comment in
    Vet Rec. 2015 Mar 7;176(10):251-2.

Although an association between clostridial pathogens and canine idiopathic 
acute haemorrhagic diarrhoea syndrome (AHDS) has been described, the relevance 
of those bacteria and their toxins remains unclear. The aim of this study was to 
evaluate the association between severity of clinical signs and presence of 
Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) and Clostridium difficile toxin A/B 
(CDT A/B) in faeces of dogs with AHDS. Faecal samples of 54 dogs with idiopathic 
AHDS were tested by qualitative CPE and CDT A/B ELISA, and PCR was performed to 
detect enterotoxin genes of C. perfringens (cpe) and toxin B genes of C. 
difficile (cdt b). Prevalence of cdt b and CDT A/B in dogs with AHDS was 10/54 
and 2/54 versus 3/23 and 0/23 in control dogs. Prevalence of cpe was 35/54 in 
affected versus 9/23 in control dogs. Prevalence of CPE in dogs with AHDS 
(13/54) was higher compared with control dogs (0/23). No significant difference 
was detected between CPE-positive and -negative and between cpe-positive and 
-negative dogs in severity of clinical signs, duration of hospitalisation, 
mortality rate and selected laboratory parameters. This study suggests that CPE 
and CDT A/B do not play a role in idiopathic AHDS, are not associated with 
clinical parameters in affected dogs and cannot be used to predict disease 
outcome.

British Veterinary Association.

DOI: 10.1136/vr.102738
PMID: 25467148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biomed Pharmacother. 2018 May;101:391-398. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.02.045. 
Epub 2018 Mar 22.

Clostridium difficile toxin B recombinant protein inhibits tumor growth and 
induces apoptosis through inhibiting Bcl-2 expression, triggering inflammatory 
responses and activating C-erbB-2 and Cox-2 expression in breast cancer mouse 
model.

Zhang Y(1), Li Y(1), Li H(1), Chen W(1), Liu W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, Changsha 410008, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University, Changsha 410008, China. Electronic address: wenenliu@163.com.

Clostridium difficile toxin B (cdtB) is a critical virulence factor 
characterized with potential cytotoxicity and pro-inflammatory activity. This 
study aims to investigate anti-tumor effects of cdtB on breast cancer 
development. Clostridium difficile strain was cultured and cdtB recombinant 
protein (rcdtB) was synthesized. Breast cancer cell line, MDA-MB-231, was 
divided into Normal control, rcdtB 50, 100, 200 and 400 ng/ml group in vitro. 
Mice were divided into Normal control and rcdtB treatment group (400 ng/ml) in 
vivo. 3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)-2,5-diphenyl-2-H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) 
assay was performed to evaluate inhibitive effects of rcdtB on cell growth. Flow 
cytometry and transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate-biotin nick end 
labeling (TUNEL) were employed to examine apoptosis in vitro and in vivo, 
respectively. Cell cycle distribution was analyzed by utilizing commercial kit. 
B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) and Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) were examined 
using western blot. Inflammatory response was detected using haematoxylin and 
eosin (HE). Erythroblastic leukemia viral oncogene homolog 2 (C-erbB-2) and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2) were examined using immunohistochemical and 
immunofluorescence assay, respectively. The results indicated that rcdtB 
significantly induced MDA-MB-231 death, inhibited growth and decreased S-phase 
cells compared to Normal control group (P < 0.05). rcdtB significantly induced 
early and late apoptosis, and decreased Bcl-2 levels compared to Normal control 
group (P < 0.05). rcdtB significantly inhibited cell migration compared to 
Normal control group (P < 0.05). rcdtB significantly inhibited tumor growth and 
activated inflammation of breast cancer model compared to Normal control group 
(P < 0.01). rcdtB significantly reduced C-erbB-2 and Cox-2 in tumor tissues 
compared to Normal control group (P < 0.01). In conclusion, rcdtB treatment 
inhibited tumor growth and induced apoptosis through inhibiting Bcl-2 
expression, inflammatory responses, and activating C-erbB-2 and Cox-2 expression 
in breast cancer mouse model.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2018.02.045
PMID: 29501042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Gut Microbes. 2017 Sep 3;8(5):504-510. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2017.1323616. Epub 
2017 Apr 28.

Collateral damage during antibiotic treatment of C. difficile infection in the 
aged host: Insights into why recurrent disease happens.

Shin JH(1), Warren CA(1).

Author information:
(1)a University of Virginia School of Medicine , Department of Medicine, 
Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health.

Erratum for
    Addendum to: van Opstal et al. Vancomycin Treatment Alters Humoral Immunity 
and Intestinal Microbiota in an Aged Mouse Model of Clostridium difficile 
Infection. J Infect Dis. (2016) 214(1):130-139. PMID: PMCID: 
doi:10.1093/infdis/jiw071.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is one of the most common causes of 
healthcare-associated infections but an even bigger problem for the aging 
population. Advanced age leads to higher incidence, higher mortality, and higher 
recurrences. In our study, recently published in the Journal of Infectious 
Diseases, we investigated the effect of aging on CDI using a mouse model. We 
were able to demonstrate that aging leads to worse clinical outcomes, as well as 
lead to changes in microbiota composition and lower antibody production against 
C. difficile toxin A, but not toxin B. An association between advanced age and 
lower antibody production against C. difficile is a new finding which would 
explain the effect of aging on CDI outcome. Vancomycin, an anti-C. difficile 
antibiotic, led to similar changes in antibody response, suggesting a connection 
between microbiome and antibody response in the context of aging, which would 
require a much more nuanced look at the treatment of CDI.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2017.1323616
PMCID: PMC5628656
PMID: 28453386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 10;11(10):e0164504. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164504. 
eCollection 2016.

More than 50% of Clostridium difficile Isolates from Pet Dogs in Flagstaff, USA, 
Carry Toxigenic Genotypes.

Stone NE(1), Sidak-Loftis LC(1), Sahl JW(1), Vazquez AJ(1), Wiggins KB(2), 
Gillece JD(2), Hicks ND(2), Schupp JM(2), Busch JD(1), Keim P(1)(2), Wagner 
DM(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Microbial Genetics and Genomics, Northern Arizona University, 
Flagstaff, AZ, 86011, United States of America.
(2)Translational Genomics Research Institute, Flagstaff, AZ, 86001, United 
States of America.

Nosocomial acquisition of Clostridium difficile is well documented, yet recent 
studies have highlighted the importance of community acquired infections and 
identified community associated reservoirs for this pathogen. Multiple studies 
have implicated companion pets and farm animals as possible sources of community 
acquired C. difficile infections in humans. To explore the potential role of pet 
dogs in human C. difficile infections we systematically collected canine fecal 
samples (n = 197) in Flagstaff, AZ. Additionally, nineteen fecal samples were 
collected at a local veterinary clinic from diarrheic dogs. We used these 
combined samples to investigate important questions regarding C. difficile 
colonization in pet canines: 1) What is the prevalence and diversity of C. 
difficile in this companion pet population, and 2) Do C. difficile isolates 
collected from canines genetically overlap with isolates that cause disease in 
humans? We used a two-step sequence typing approach, including multilocus 
sequence typing to determine the overall genetic diversity of C. difficile 
present in Flagstaff canines, and whole-genome sequencing to assess the 
fine-scale diversity patterns within identical multilocus sequence types from 
isolates obtained within and among multiple canine hosts. We detected C. 
difficile in 17% of the canine fecal samples with 10% containing toxigenic 
strains that are known to cause human disease. Sequencing analyses revealed 
similar genotypes in dogs and humans. These findings suggest that companion pets 
are a potential source of community acquired C. difficile infections in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164504
PMCID: PMC5056695
PMID: 27723795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


119. Zoonoses Public Health. 2018 Feb;65(1):88-95. doi: 10.1111/zph.12374. Epub 2017 
Jul 7.

Recreational sandboxes for children and dogs can be a source of epidemic 
ribotypes of Clostridium difficile.

Orden C(1), Neila C(1), Blanco JL(1), Álvarez-Pérez S(1), Harmanus C(2), Kuijper 
EJ(2), García ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Center of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.

Different studies have suggested that the sand of public playgrounds could have 
a role in the transmission of infections, particularly in children. Furthermore, 
free access of pets and other animals to the playgrounds might increase such a 
risk. We studied the presence of Clostridium difficile in 20 pairs of sandboxes 
for children and dogs located in different playgrounds within the Madrid region 
(Spain). Clostridium difficile isolation was performed by enrichment and 
selective culture procedures. The genetic (ribotype and amplified fragment 
length polymorphism [AFLP]) diversity and antibiotic susceptibility of isolates 
was also studied. Overall, 52.5% (21/40) of samples were positive for the 
presence of C. difficile. Eight of the 20 available isolates belonged to the 
toxigenic ribotypes 014 (n = 5) and 106 (n = 2), both regarded as epidemic, and 
CD047 (n = 1). The other 12 isolates were non-toxigenic, and belonged to 
ribotypes 009 (n = 5), 039 (n = 4), and 067, 151 and CD048 (one isolate each). 
Nevertheless, all isolates (even those of a same ribotype) were classified into 
different AFLP genotypes indicating non-relatedness. In conclusion, our results 
revealed the presence of epidemic ribotypes of C. difficile in children's and 
dog's sandboxes located nearby, which constitutes a major health risk.

© 2017 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/zph.12374
PMID: 28686001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Oct 14;12(10):e1005946. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005946. 
eCollection 2016 Oct.

A Clostridium difficile Cell Wall Glycopolymer Locus Influences Bacterial Shape, 
Polysaccharide Production and Virulence.

Chu M(1), Mallozzi MJ(1), Roxas BP(1), Bertolo L(2), Monteiro MA(2), Agellon 
A(1), Viswanathan VK(1)(3), Vedantam G(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Animal and Comparative Biomedical Sciences, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, Arizona, United States of America.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Immunobiology, Bio5 Institute for Collaborative Research, 
University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States of America.
(4)Southern Arizona VA Healthcare System, Tucson, Arizona, United States of 
America.

Clostridium difficile is a diarrheagenic pathogen associated with significant 
mortality and morbidity. While its glucosylating toxins are primary virulence 
determinants, there is increasing appreciation of important roles for non-toxin 
factors in C. difficile pathogenesis. Cell wall glycopolymers (CWGs) influence 
the virulence of various pathogens. Five C. difficile CWGs, including PSII, have 
been structurally characterized, but their biosynthesis and significance in C. 
difficile infection is unknown. We explored the contribution of a conserved CWG 
locus to C. difficile cell-surface integrity and virulence. Attempts at 
disrupting multiple genes in the locus, including one encoding a predicted CWG 
exporter mviN, were unsuccessful, suggesting essentiality of the respective gene 
products. However, antisense RNA-mediated mviN downregulation resulted in slight 
morphology defects, retarded growth, and decreased surface PSII deposition. Two 
other genes, lcpA and lcpB, with putative roles in CWG anchoring, could be 
disrupted by insertional inactivation. lcpA- and lcpB- mutants had distinct 
phenotypes, implying non-redundant roles for the respective proteins. The lcpB- 
mutant was defective in surface PSII deposition and shedding, and exhibited a 
remodeled cell surface characterized by elongated and helical morphology, 
aberrantly-localized cell septae, and an altered surface-anchored protein 
profile. Both lcpA- and lcpB- strains also displayed heightened virulence in a 
hamster model of C. difficile disease. We propose that gene products of the C. 
difficile CWG locus are essential, that they direct the production/assembly of 
key antigenic surface polysaccharides, and thereby have complex roles in 
virulence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005946
PMCID: PMC5065235
PMID: 27741317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


121. Toxins (Basel). 2019 Jun 17;11(6):348. doi: 10.3390/toxins11060348.

Toxin B Variants from Clostridium difficile Strains VPI 10463 and NAP1/027 Share 
Similar Substrate Profile and Cellular Intoxication Kinetics but Use Different 
Host Cell Entry Factors.

López-Ureña D(1), Orozco-Aguilar J(2), Chaves-Madrigal Y(3), Ramírez-Mata A(4), 
Villalobos-Jimenez A(5), Ost S(6), Quesada-Gómez C(7), Rodríguez C(8), 
Papatheodorou P(9), Chaves-Olarte E(10).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, 10101 San José, Costa Rica. 
diana.lopezurena@ucr.ac.cr.
(2)Facultad de Farmacia and Laboratorio de Ensayos Biológicos, Escuela de 
Medicina, Universidad de Costa Rica, 10101 San José, Costa Rica. 
josue.orozco@ucr.ac.cr.
(3)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, 10101 San José, Costa Rica. 
yencu91@gmail.com.
(4)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, 10101 San José, Costa Rica. 
andre.rm28@gmail.com.
(5)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, 10101 San José, Costa Rica. 
amandalucia94@gmail.com.
(6)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany. 
stefan.ost@gmx.net.
(7)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, 10101 San José, Costa Rica. 
carlos.quesada@ucr.ac.cr.
(8)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, 10101 San José, Costa Rica. 
cesar.rodriguezsanchez@ucr.ac.cr.
(9)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, D-89081 
Ulm, Germany. panagiotis.papatheodorou@uni-ulm.de.
(10)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, 10101 San José, Costa Rica. 
esteban.chaves@ucr.ac.cr.

Clostridium difficile induces antibiotic-associated diarrhea due to the release 
of toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), the latter being its main virulence 
factor. The epidemic strain NAP1/027 has an increased virulence attributed to 
different factors. We compared cellular intoxication by TcdBNAP1 with that by 
the reference strain VPI 10463 (TcdBVPI). In a mouse ligated intestinal loop 
model, TcdBNAP1 induced higher neutrophil recruitment, cytokine release, and 
epithelial damage than TcdBVPI. Both toxins modified the same panel of small 
GTPases and exhibited similar in vitro autoprocessing kinetics. On the basis of 
sequence variations in the frizzled-binding domain (FBD), we reasoned that 
TcdBVPI and TcdBNAP1 might have different receptor specificities. To test this 
possibility, we used a TcdB from a NAP1 variant strain (TcdBNAP1v) unable to 
glucosylate RhoA but with the same receptor-binding domains as TcdBNAP1. Cells 
were preincubated with TcdBNAP1v to block cellular receptors, prior to 
intoxication with either TcdBVPI or TcdBNAP1. Preincubation with TcdBNAP1v 
blocked RhoA glucosylation by TcdBNAP1 but not by TcdBVPI, indicating that the 
toxins use different host factors for cell entry. This crucial difference might 
explain the increased biological activity of TcdBNAP1 in the intestine, 
representing a contributing factor for the increased virulence of the NAP1/027 
strain.

DOI: 10.3390/toxins11060348
PMCID: PMC6628394
PMID: 31212980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


122. Front Microbiol. 2017 Apr 21;8:625. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00625. eCollection 
2017.

Protective Effect of Carvacrol against Gut Dysbiosis and Clostridium difficile 
Associated Disease in a Mouse Model.

Mooyottu S(1), Flock G(1), Upadhyay A(1), Upadhyaya I(1), Maas K(2), 
Venkitanarayanan K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of ConnecticutStorrs, CT, USA.
(2)Microbial Analysis, Resources, and Services, University of ConnecticutStorrs, 
CT, USA.

This study investigated the effect of carvacrol (CR), a phytophenolic compound 
on antibiotic-associated gut dysbiosis and C. difficile infection in a mouse 
model. Five to six-week-old C57BL/6 mice were randomly divided into seven 
treatment groups (challenge and control) of eight mice each. Mice were fed with 
irradiated feed supplemented with CR (0, 0.05, and 0.1%); the challenge groups 
were made susceptible to C. difficile by orally administering an antibiotic 
cocktail in water and an intra-peritoneal injection of clindamycin. Both 
challenge and control groups were infected with 105CFU/ml of hypervirulent C. 
difficile (ATCC 1870) spores or PBS, and observed for clinical signs for 10 
days. Respective control groups for CR, antibiotics, and their combination were 
included for investigating their effect on mouse enteric microflora. Mouse body 
weight and clinical and diarrhea scores were recorded daily post infection. 
Fecal samples were collected for microbiome analysis using rRNA sequencing in 
MiSeq platform. Carvacrol supplementation significantly reduced the incidence of 
diarrhea and improved the clinical and diarrhea scores in mice (p < 0.05). 
Microbiome analysis revealed a significant increase in Proteobacteria and 
reduction in the abundance of protective bacterial flora in antibiotic-treated 
and C. difficile-infected mice compared to controls (p < 0.05). However, CR 
supplementation positively altered the microbiome composition, as revealed by an 
increased abundance of beneficial bacteria, including Firmicutes, and 
significantly reduced the proportion of detrimental flora such as 
Proteobacteria, without significantly affecting the gut microbiome diversity 
compared to control. Results suggest that CR could potentially be used to 
control gut dysbiosis and reduce C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00625
PMCID: PMC5399026
PMID: 28484429


123. Equine Vet Educ. 2018 Mar;30(3):151-160. doi: 10.1111/eve.12559. Epub 2016 Feb 
28.

Equine faecal microbiota transplant: Current knowledge, proposed guidelines and 
future directions.

Mullen KR(1), Yasuda K(2), Divers TJ(3), Weese JS(4).

Author information:
(1)Littleton Equine Medical Center Colorado USA.
(2)Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health Boston Massachusetts USA.
(3)Department of Clinical Sciences Cornell University College of Veterinary 
Medicine Ithaca New York USA.
(4)Department of Pathobiology Ontario Veterinary College University of Guelph 
Canada.

While certainly not a novel concept, faecal microbiota transplant (FMT) has 
recently garnered renewed interest in veterinary medicine due to its remarkable 
success in treating recurrent Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in man. 
There is a dearth of information on indications and efficacy of FMT for the 
treatment of gastrointestinal disorders in the horse; however, based on evidence 
in man and other veterinary species, and anecdotal reports in horses, FMT may be 
a useful treatment for selected cases of acute and chronic diarrhoea and 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in the horse. In the absence of evidence, 
expert opinion is offered on case selection and FMT procedure. More research is 
needed to explore the efficacy, indications and optimal preparation, storage and 
delivery of FMT to horses.

© 2016 EVJ Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/eve.12559
PMCID: PMC7159401
PMID: 32313396


124. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Jan 14;20(2):312. doi: 10.3390/ijms20020312.

Fatty Acid Potassium Had Beneficial Bactericidal Effects and Removed 
Staphylococcus aureus Biofilms while Exhibiting Reduced Cytotoxicity towards 
Mouse Fibroblasts and Human Keratinocytes.

Kawahara T(1)(2), Takita M(3), Masunaga A(4), Morita H(5), Tsukatani T(6), 
Nakazawa K(7), Go D(8), Akita S(9).

Author information:
(1)Shabondama Soap Co., Ltd., Kitakyushu 808-0195, Japan. kawahara@shabon.com.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Kitakyushu 807-0804, Japan. kawahara@shabon.com.
(3)Shabondama Soap Co., Ltd., Kitakyushu 808-0195, Japan. 
miki-takita@shabon.com.
(4)Shabondama Soap Co., Ltd., Kitakyushu 808-0195, Japan. 
akihiro-masunaga@shabon.com.
(5)Shabondama Soap Co., Ltd., Kitakyushu 808-0195, Japan. h-morita@shabon.com.
(6)Biotechnology and Food Research Institute, Fukuoka Industrial Technology 
Center, Kurume 839-0861, Japan. tukatani@fitc.pref.fukuoka.jp.
(7)Department of Life and Environment Engineering, The University of Kitakyushu, 
Kitakyushu 808-0135, Japan. nakazawa@kitakyu-u.ac.jp.
(8)Department of Life and Environment Engineering, The University of Kitakyushu, 
Kitakyushu 808-0135, Japan. y7mab007@eng.kitakyu-u.ac.jp.
(9)Department of Plastic Surgery, Wound Repair and Regeneration, Fukuoka 
University, Fukuoka 814-0180, Japan. akitas@hf.rim.or.jp.

Wounds frequently become infected or contaminated with bacteria. Potassium 
oleate (C18:1K), a type of fatty acid potassium, caused >4 log colony-forming 
unit (CFU)/mL reductions in the numbers of Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia 
coli within 10 min and a >2 log CFU/mL reduction in the number of Clostridium 
difficile within 1 min. C18:1K (proportion removed: 90.3%) was significantly 
more effective at removing Staphylococcus aureus biofilms than the synthetic 
surfactant detergents sodium lauryl ether sulfate (SLES) (74.8%, p < 0.01) and 
sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) (78.0%, p < 0.05). In the WST (water-soluble 
tetrazolium) assay, mouse fibroblasts (BALB/3T3 clone A31) in C18:1K (relative 
viability vs. control: 102.8%) demonstrated a significantly higher viability 
than those in SLES (30.1%) or SLS (18.1%, p < 0.05). In a lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH) leakage assay, C18:1K (relative leakage vs. control: 108.9%) was found to 
be associated with a significantly lower LDH leakage from mouse fibroblasts than 
SLES or SLS (720.6% and 523.4%, respectively; p < 0.05). Potassium oleate 
demonstrated bactericidal effects against various species including 
Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Bacillus cereus, and Clostridium 
difficile; removed significantly greater amounts of Staphylococcus aureus 
biofilm material than SLES and SLS; and maintained fibroblast viability; 
therefore, it might be useful for wound cleaning and peri-wound skin.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20020312
PMCID: PMC6359264
PMID: 30646547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


125. Cytokine. 2016 Dec;88:232-240. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2016.09.017. Epub 2016 Sep 
26.

Chemokine CXCL13 expression was up-regulated in Clostridium difficile infection.

Wang L(1), Cao J(1), Li C(1), Zhang L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. Electronic address: 
1309898173@qq.com.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the leading cause of antibiotic- and 
healthcare-associated diarrhea. CXCL13 is a well-known CXC chemokine involved in 
inflammation, but its role in CDI remains unknown. In this study, serum and 
fecal samplings were collected from 51 CDI patients, 50 diarrhea patients 
without CDI and 50 healthy control subjects to determine the CXCL13 levels by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Besides, a mouse model of C. 
difficile infection was established, and murine serum and colon tissues were 
collected for detection of CXCL13 expression using quantitative real-time 
RT-PCR, ELISA, Western blot, or immunohistochemistry. We found that CXCL13 
concentration in serum and fecal samples from CDI patients was significantly 
higher compared with that from diarrhea patients without CDI and that from 
healthy controls. Elevated serum CXCL13 positively and significantly correlated 
with blood markers of inflammation and yielded an increased area under the ROC 
curve of 0.929. In murine C. difficile infection, CXCL13 were also dramatically 
increased in serum and infected colon tissues at the transcriptional and protein 
levels. The elevated CXCL13 levels positively and significantly correlated with 
inflammatory scores. Therefore, CDI is associated with enhanced release of 
CXCL13. This study indicated that CXCL13 may be pathogenically involved in CDI 
and served as a potential new biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis in CDI.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2016.09.017
PMID: 27685937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2018 Sep;42(7):1156-1167. doi: 10.1002/jpen.1053. 
Epub 2018 Jan 31.

Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and a Prebiotic Protect Intestinal Health in a 
Mouse Model of Antibiotic and Clostridium difficile Exposure.

Roychowdhury S(1), Cadnum J(2), Glueck B(1), Obrenovich M(2), Donskey C(2)(3), 
Cresci GAM(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Lerner Research Institute, Department of Pathobiology, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Research Service, Louis Stokes Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Case Western Reserve 
University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Pediatric Institute, Department of Gastroenterology, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Digestive Disease & Surgery Institute, Department of Gastroenterology & 
Hepatology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile (CD) infection (CDI) increases patient 
morbidity, mortality and healthcare costs. Antibiotic treatment induces gut 
dysbiosis and is both a major risk factor for CD colonization and treatment of 
CDI. Probiotics have been trialed to support commensal gut microbiota and reduce 
CDI. This study investigated commensal microbe Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (FP) 
and a prebiotic, both known to yield butyrate and be anti-inflammatory and 
immunomodulatory, on CD colonization and gut integrity in mice.
METHODS: Mice were randomly grouped and supplemented daily with FP, prebiotic, 
FP + prebiotic, FP/prebiotic supernatant, or saline throughout the entire study. 
Following treatment with clindamycin for 3 days, mice were exposed to CD. Feces 
were collected at baseline, the day after antibiotic, and 1, 3, and 5 days after 
CD exposure and cultured for bacterial overgrowth and CD colonization. On days 1 
and 5 after CD exposure, mice were randomly euthanized, and proximal colon was 
dissected for histological analysis and preparation of RNA for analysis of 
proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines.
RESULTS: Although all mice exhibited bacterial overgrowth and CD colonization, 
bacterial burden resolved quicker in the FP + prebiotic group. This was 
associated with induction and resolution of innate immune responses, anion 
exchanger, and tight junction protein preservation in proximal colon. CD toxin 
virulence potential was questionable as expression of CD toxin B receptor was 
depleted in the FP + prebiotic group.
CONCLUSION: Supplementation with anti-inflammatory butyrate-supporting commensal 
bacteria and prebiotic may support innate immune responses and minimize 
bacterial burden and negative effects during antibiotic and CD exposure.

© 2018 American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1002/jpen.1053
PMCID: PMC6068000
PMID: 29385239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None declared. The 
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily 
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.


127. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2012 Dec;67(12):2919-26. doi: 10.1093/jac/dks309. Epub 
2012 Aug 16.

Oritavancin does not induce Clostridium difficile germination and toxin 
production in hamsters or a human gut model.

Freeman J(1), Marquis M, Crowther GS, Todhunter SL, Fawley WN, Chilton CH, Moeck 
G, Lehoux D, Wilcox MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, The General 
Infirmary, Old Medical School, Leeds LS1 3EX, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the relative propensities of oritavancin and vancomycin 
to induce Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in hamster and in vitro human 
gut models.
METHODS: Hamsters received clindamycin (100 mg/kg orally or subcutaneously), 
oritavancin (50 mg/kg orally) or vancomycin (50 mg/kg orally). C. difficile 
spores were administered orally the next day. Control hamsters received vehicle 
only (polyethylene glycol 400) plus spores or clindamycin but no spores. 
Hamsters were monitored for clinical signs for 20 days. Caecal contents were 
analysed for C. difficile cells, spores and the presence of (cyto)toxin. 
Oritavancin and vancomycin were instilled over 7 days into separate in vitro gut 
models primed with pooled human faeces and inoculated with C. difficile ribotype 
027 spores. Gut flora, C. difficile total viable and spore counts, toxin titres 
and antimicrobial concentrations were determined.
RESULTS: All hamsters treated with oritavancin survived up to 20 days, with no 
evidence of C. difficile spores, vegetative cells or toxin in their caeca. No 
hamsters treated with clindamycin or vancomycin survived >6 days after spore 
administration. Death was associated with high C. difficile counts and toxin in 
caecal contents. In the gut model, oritavancin dosing elicited a rapid, marked 
decrease in total viable C. difficile and spore counts to below the limit of 
detection. Vancomycin did not elicit germination or toxin production in the gut 
model, but C. difficile remained present as spores throughout.
CONCLUSIONS: Oritavancin exposure, unlike exposure to vancomycin or clindamycin, 
did not lead to CDI in hamsters. In both models, oritavancin reduced C. 
difficile total counts and spores to below detectable limits. The data indicate 
the potential of oritavancin for CDI treatment, since exposure did not induce C. 
difficile germination and toxin production, which are known to exacerbate the 
disease state.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dks309
PMID: 22899803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e73653. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073653. eCollection 
2013.

Muricholic acids inhibit Clostridium difficile spore germination and growth.

Francis MB(1), Allen CA, Sorg JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United 
States of America.

Infections caused by Clostridium difficile have increased steadily over the past 
several years. While studies on C. difficile virulence and physiology have been 
hindered, in the past, by lack of genetic approaches and suitable animal models, 
newly developed technologies and animal models allow these processes to be 
studied in detail. One such advance is the generation of a mouse-model of C. 
difficile infection. The development of this system is a major step forward in 
analyzing the genetic requirements for colonization and infection. While 
important, it is equally as important in understanding what differences exist 
between mice and humans. One of these differences is the natural bile acid 
composition. Bile acid-mediated spore germination is an important step in C. 
difficile colonization. Mice produce several different bile acids that are not 
found in humans. These muricholic acids have the potential to impact C. 
difficile spore germination. Here we find that the three muricholic acids 
(α-muricholic acid, β-muricholic acid and ω-muricholic acid) inhibit C. 
difficile spore germination and can impact the growth of vegetative cells. These 
results highlight an important difference between humans and mice and may have 
an impact on C. difficile virulence in the mouse-model of C. difficile 
infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073653
PMCID: PMC3767737
PMID: 24040011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


129. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Sep 24;62(10):e02251-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.02251-17. Print 2018 Oct.

Effect of the Synthetic Bile Salt Analog CamSA on the Hamster Model of 
Clostridium difficile Infection.

Howerton A(1), Seymour CO(2), Murugapiran SK(2), Liao Z(3), Phan JR(4), Estrada 
A(1), Wagner AJ(1), Mefferd CC(2), Hedlund BP(2)(5), Abel-Santos E(6)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical and Life Sciences, Nevada State College, Henderson, 
Nevada, USA.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada, 
USA.
(3)College of Food Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada, 
USA.
(5)Nevada Institute of Personalized Medicine, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA.
(6)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada, 
USA ernesto.abelsantos@unlv.edu.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the leading cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and has gained worldwide notoriety due to 
emerging hypervirulent strains and the high incidence of recurrence. We 
previously reported protection of mice from CDI using the antigerminant bile 
salt analog CamSA. Here we describe the effects of CamSA in the hamster model of 
CDI. CamSA treatment of hamsters showed no toxicity and did not affect the 
richness or diversity of gut microbiota; however, minor changes in community 
composition were observed. Treatment of C. difficile-challenged hamsters with 
CamSA doubled the mean time to death, compared to control hamsters. However, 
CamSA alone was insufficient to prevent CDI in hamsters. CamSA in conjunction 
with suboptimal concentrations of vancomycin led to complete protection from CDI 
in 70% of animals. Protected animals remained disease-free at least 30 days 
postchallenge and showed no signs of colonic tissue damage. In a 
delayed-treatment model of hamster CDI, CamSA was unable to prevent infection 
signs and death. These data support a putative model in which CamSA reduces the 
number of germinating C. difficile spores but does not keep all of the spores 
from germinating. Vancomycin halts division of any vegetative cells that are 
able to grow from spores that escape CamSA.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02251-17
PMCID: PMC6153836
PMID: 30012758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Anaerobe. 2018 Oct;53:56-63. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.06.014. Epub 2018 Jun 
23.

Neutralization of macrophage migration inhibitory factor improves host survival 
after Clostridium difficile infection.

Jose S(1), Mukherjee A(1), Abhyankar MM(2), Leng L(3), Bucala R(3), Sharma D(4), 
Madan R(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA.
(3)Departments of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA; Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. 
Electronic address: rajat.madan@uc.edu.

Clostridium difficile is an important cause of nosocomial diarrhea in the 
western world. Toxins (A, B, and binary toxins) generated by C. difficile 
bacteria damage intestinal epithelial cells. Hallmarks of host response to 
C. difficile infection (CDI) include upregulation of inflammatory mediators and 
tissue infiltration by immune cells. Macrophage migration inhibitory factor 
(MIF) is an inflammatory cytokine that is known to enhance the host immune 
response to infectious pathogens. Additionally, MIF can adversely impact host 
survival to numerous infections. The role of MIF in the pathogenesis of CDI 
remains poorly understood. Here, we show that patients with CDI had 
significantly higher circulating MIF compared to patients who had diarrhea but 
tested negative for C. difficile (non-CDI controls). Similarly, in a mouse 
model, C. difficile challenge significantly increased levels of plasma and 
tissue MIF. Antibody-mediated depletion of MIF decreased C. difficile-induced 
inflammatory responses, clinical disease, and mortality. Together, these results 
uncover a potential role for MIF in exacerbating CDI and suggest that use of 
anti-MIF antibodies may represent a therapeutic strategy to curb host 
inflammatory responses and improve disease outcomes in CDI.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.06.014
PMCID: PMC6309669
PMID: 29944928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest R. Bucala is a co-inventor 
on patents for anti-MIF.


131. Vet J. 2011 Oct;190(1):119-23. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2010.10.001. Epub 2010 Oct 
28.

Real-time PCR and typing of Clostridium difficile isolates colonizing mare-foal 
pairs.

Magdesian KG(1), Leutenegger CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, University of California, Davis, CA 
95616, USA. kgmagdesian@vmth.ucdavis.edu

Clostridium difficile infection can occur in the dams of sick foals, but it is 
unknown if mares and foals share the same isolates. In this study, C. difficile 
isolates from fecal samples of 11 mares paired with 11 foals were genotyped by 
arbitrarily primed PCR; two mares and three foals in five mare-foal pairs had 
diarrhea. Fecal immunoassays were utilized to detect C. difficile common antigen 
and toxin A. Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) systems were developed to detect 
genes for toxins A and B, as well as for binary toxin B. Sequences of all toxins 
were present in all isolates, although only one horse was positive for toxin A 
on fecal immunoassay. Identical strains of C. difficile were present in 4/11 
(36.4%) mare-foal pairs. Mare-foal pairs can harbor C. difficile subclinically 
and are potential reservoirs for colonization of each other.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2010.10.001
PMID: 21035363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Small Anim Pract. 2015 Mar;56(3):190-5. doi: 10.1111/jsap.12311. Epub 2014 Dec 
5.

Faecal shedding of antimicrobial-resistant Clostridium difficile strains by 
dogs.

Álvarez-Pérez S(1), Blanco JL, Peláez T, Lanzarot MP, Harmanus C, Kuijper E, 
García ME.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Sanidad Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad 
Complutense, Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: To longitudinally assess the shedding of antimicrobial resistant 
Clostridium difficile strains by clinically healthy dogs raised at breeding 
facilities.
METHODS: 18 puppies from three different litters (#1, 2 and 3) were sampled 
weekly from parturition to day 20-55 postpartum. Faecal samples from the mothers 
of litters #2 and 3 were also available for analysis. Bacterial isolates were 
ribotyped, tested for in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility and further 
characterised.
RESULTS: C. difficile was recovered from all sampled animals of litters #1 and 
2, and a third of puppies from litter #3, but marked differences in C. difficile 
recovery were detected in different age groups (0-100%). Recovered PCR ribotypes 
included 056 (22 isolates), 010 (6 isolates), 078 and 213 (2 isolates each), and 
009 and 020 (1 isolate each). Different ribotypes were shed by four individual 
animals. Regardless of their origin and ribotype, all isolates demonstrated full 
resistance to levofloxacin. Additionally, all but one isolate (belonging to 
ribotype 078) were resistant to ertapenem, and all ribotype 010 isolates 
displayed high-level resistance to clindamycin, clarithromycin and erythromycin. 
A single ribotype 078 isolate showed metronidazole heteroresistance.
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Healthy dogs can shed antimicrobial-resistant C. 
difficile strains.

© 2014 British Small Animal Veterinary Association.

DOI: 10.1111/jsap.12311
PMID: 25483272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. ChemMedChem. 2018 Jul 18;13(14):1414-1420. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201800240. Epub 
2018 Jun 14.

Bis-Cyclic Guanidines as a Novel Class of Compounds Potent against Clostridium 
difficile.

Li C(1)(2), Teng P(3), Peng Z(1)(4), Sang P(3), Sun X(1), Cai J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. Downs Boulevard, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.
(2)Department of Infection Control Center of Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, 410008, China.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of South Florida, 4202 E. Fowler Avenue, 
Tampa, FL, 33620, USA.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) symptoms range from diarrhea to severe 
toxic megacolon and even death. Due to its rapid acquisition of resistance, 
C. difficile is listed as an urgent antibiotic-resistant threat, and has 
surpassed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) as the most common 
hospital-acquired infection in the USA. To combat this pathogen, a new 
structural class of pseudo-peptides that exhibit antimicrobial activities could 
play an important role. Herein we report a set of bis-cyclic guanidine compounds 
that show potent antibacterial activity against C. difficile with decent 
selectivity. Eight compounds showed high in vitro potency against C. difficile 
UK6 with MIC values of 1.0 μg mL-1 , and cytotoxic selectivity index (SI) values 
up to 37. Moreover, the most selective compound is also effective in the 
treatment of C. difficile-induced disease in a mouse model of CDI, and appears 
to be a very promising new candidate for the treatment of CDI.

© 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/cmdc.201800240
PMCID: PMC6121702
PMID: 29768720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.


134. Anaerobe. 2016 Feb;37:58-61. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.10.002. Epub 2015 Oct 
9.

Distribution and characterization of Clostridium difficile isolated from dogs in 
Japan.

Usui M(1), Suzuki K(1), Oka K(2), Miyamoto K(2), Takahashi M(3), Inamatsu T(4), 
Kamiya S(5), Tamura Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Safety, Department of Health and 
Environmental Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen University, 
Hokkaido, Japan.
(2)Miyarisan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Miyarisan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan; Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyorin University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Safety, Department of Health and 
Environmental Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen University, 
Hokkaido, Japan. Electronic address: tamuray@rakuno.ac.jp.

We collected 204 nondiarrhoeic canine fecal samples and isolated 68 Clostridium 
difficile strains from 62 of these samples. Strains were grouped into 29 PCR 
ribotypes. Only 47% of the strains were toxigenic.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.10.002
PMID: 26456188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Infect Immun. 2011 Jul;79(7):2856-64. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01336-10. Epub 2011 May 
16.

Mouse relapse model of Clostridium difficile infection.

Sun X(1), Wang H, Zhang Y, Chen K, Davis B, Feng H.

Author information:
(1)Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, Massachusetts 
01536, USA.

Clostridium difficile is the causative agent of primary and recurrent 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis in hospitalized patients. The disease 
is caused mainly by two exotoxins, TcdA and TcdB, produced by the bacteria. 
Recurrent C. difficile infection (CDI) constitutes one of the most significant 
clinical issues of this disease, occurs in more than 20% of patients after the 
first episode, and may be increasing in frequency. However, there is no 
well-established animal model of CDI relapse currently available for studying 
disease pathogenesis, prevention, and therapy. Here we report the establishment 
of a conventional mouse model of recurrence/relapse CDI. We found that the 
primary episode of CDI induced little or no protective antibody response against 
C. difficile toxins and mice continued shedding C. difficile spores. Antibiotic 
treatment of surviving mice induced a second episode of diarrhea, while a 
simultaneous reexposure of animals to C. difficile bacteria or spores elicited a 
full spectrum of CDI similar to that of the primary infection. Moreover, mice 
treated with immunosuppressive agents were prone to more severe and fulminant 
recurrent disease. Finally, utilizing this model, we demonstrated that 
vancomycin only delayed disease recurrence, whereas neutralizing polysera 
against both TcdA and TcdB completely protected mice against CDI relapse. In 
conclusion, we have established a mouse relapse CDI model that allows for future 
investigations of the role of the host immune response in the disease's 
pathogenesis and permits critical testing of new therapeutics targeting 
recurrent disease.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01336-10
PMCID: PMC3191975
PMID: 21576341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Aug;56(8):4459-62. doi: 10.1128/AAC.06355-11. 
Epub 2012 May 29.

Efficacy of LFF571 in a hamster model of Clostridium difficile infection.

Trzasko A(1), Leeds JA, Praestgaard J, Lamarche MJ, McKenney D.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Infectious Disease Area, 
Emeryville, California, USA.

LFF571 is a novel semisynthetic thiopeptide antibiotic with potent activity 
against a variety of Gram-positive pathogens, including Clostridium difficile. 
In vivo efficacy of LFF571 was compared to vancomycin in a hamster model of C. 
difficile infection (CDI). Infection was induced in Golden Syrian hamsters using 
a toxigenic strain of C. difficile. Treatment started 24 h postinfection and 
consisted of saline, vancomycin, or LFF571. Cox regression was used to analyze 
survival data from a cohort of animals evaluated across seven serial 
experimental groups treated with vancomycin at 20 mg/kg, LFF571 at 5 mg/kg, or 
vehicle alone. Survival was right censored; animals were not observed beyond day 
21. At death or end of study, cecal contents were tested for C. difficile toxins 
A and B. In summary, the data showed that 5 mg/kg LFF571 decreased the risk of 
death by 79% (P < 0.0001) and 69% (P = 0.0022) compared with saline and 20 mg/kg 
vancomycin, respectively. Further analysis of the pooled data indicated that the 
survival benefit of LFF571 treatment at 5 mg/kg compared to vancomycin at 20 
mg/kg was due primarily to a decrease in the risk of recurrence after end of 
treatment. Animals successfully treated with LFF571 or vancomycin had no 
detectable C. difficile toxin. Overall, LFF571 was more efficacious at the end 
of the study, at a lower dose, and with fewer recurrences, than vancomycin in 
the hamster model of CDI. LFF571 is being assessed in humans for safety and 
efficacy in the treatment of C. difficile infections.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.06355-11
PMCID: PMC3421564
PMID: 22644020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Anaerobe. 2009 Dec;15(6):252-5. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2009.07.004. Epub 2009 
Jul 24.

Diversity of Clostridium difficile in pigs and other animals in Slovenia.

Avbersek J(1), Janezic S, Pate M, Rupnik M, Zidaric V, Logar K, Vengust M, 
Zemljic M, Pirs T, Ocepek M.

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Faculty, University of Ljubljana, Gerbiceva 60, SI-1000 Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.

A study of Clostridium difficile diversity in pigs, calves and horses in 
Slovenia was conducted. A total of 547 samples were collected and C. difficile 
was isolated from 247/485 (50.9%) piglet samples, from 4/42 (9.5%) calf samples, 
and 1/20 (5%) horse samples. The isolates were characterized by toxinotyping, 
PCR-ribotyping, and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) using restriction 
endonuclease SmaI. Piglet isolates belonged to two toxinotypes (V and 0), four 
PCR-ribotypes (066, 029, SI 011, SI 010), and six pulsotypes. Bovine isolates 
were grouped into two toxinotypes (XIa and 0), three PCR-ribotypes (077, 002, 
033), and three pulsotypes. The only equine isolate was indistinguishable from 
one calf isolate (XIa/033) in toxinotype, PCR-ribotype, and pulsotype. None of 
detected genotypes was present in all three animal hosts.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2009.07.004
PMID: 19632350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Vet Intern Med. 2002 Sep-Oct;16(5):533-40. doi: 
10.1892/0891-6640(2002)016<0533:gapcop>2.3.co;2.

Genotypic and phenotypic characterization of Clostridium perfringens and 
Clostridium difficile in diarrheic and healthy dogs.

Marks SL(1), Kather EJ, Kass PH, Melli AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine , School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
California, Davis 95616, USA. slmarks@ucdavis.edu

Comment in
    J Vet Intern Med. 2003 Mar-Apr;17(2):123; author reply 123.

The objectives of this study were to examine the potential roles of Clostridium 
difficile and enterotoxigenic Clostridium perfringens in diarrhea in dogs by 
comparison of isolation, determination of toxin status via enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and application of multiplex polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR). These techniques were used to evaluate fecal specimens in 132 
healthy and diarrheic dogs. These dogs were prospectively evaluated by grouping 
them into the following 3 categories: hospitalized dogs with diarrhea (n = 32), 
hospitalized dogs without diarrhea (n = 42), and apparently healthy outpatient 
dogs without diarrhea (n = 58). All fecal specimens were cultured using 
selective media for C difficile, Salmonella spp., and Campylobacter spp. and 
selective media after heat shock for C perfringens. No significant difference 
was found in the isolation of C perfringens or C difficile among the 3 groups. A 
significant association was found between the presence of diarrhea and detection 
of C perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) or toxin A via ELISA for both C perfringens 
and C difficile, respectively. PCR performed on C difficile isolates for toxin A 
and toxin B genes revealed no significant differences among the 3 groups, but 
diarrheic dogs were significantly more likely to be positive for the enterotoxin 
gene of C perfringens. Based on the results of this study, the use of ELISA for 
detection of CPE in feces combined with the detection of enterotoxigenic fecal 
isolates obtained via heat shock provides the strongest evidence for the 
presence of C perfringens-associated diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1892/0891-6640(2002)016<0533:gapcop>2.3.co;2
PMID: 12322702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Med Microbiol. 2005 Feb;54(Pt 2):163-166. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.45805-0.

PCR ribotyping of Clostridium difficile isolates originating from human and 
animal sources.

Arroyo LG(1), Kruth SA(1), Willey BM(1), Staempfli HR(1), Low DE(1), Weese 
JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada N1G 2W1 2Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Molecular typing of Clostridium difficile isolates from animals and humans may 
be useful for evaluation of the possibility for interspecies transmission. The 
objective of this study was to evaluate C. difficile isolates from domestic 
animals and humans using PCR ribotyping. Isolates were also tested using PCR for 
the presence of genes encoding toxins A and B. One hundred and thirty-three 
isolates of C. difficile from dogs (n = 92), horses (n = 21) and humans (n = 
20), plus one each from a cat and a calf, were evaluated. Overall, 23 ribotypes 
were identified. Of these, nine were identified from dogs, 12 from horses, seven 
from humans and one each from the cat and calf. In dogs, humans and horses, one 
or two different ribotypes predominated. Overall, 25 % of isolates from humans 
were indistinguishable from isolates from one or more animal species. Genes 
encoding C. difficile toxins A and B were detected in all human, equine and 
bovine isolates, and in 69 % of canine isolates. While different ribotypes 
appear to predominate in different mammalian species, several indistinguishable 
strains may be found in multiple species. This suggests that there is a 
potential for interspecies transmission of C. difficile and epidemiological 
studies are warranted.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.45805-0
PMID: 15673511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Anaerobe. 2015 Feb;31:42-6. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2014.10.003. Epub 2014 Oct 
12.

Antibiotic resistance patterns and PCR-ribotyping of Clostridium difficile 
strains isolated from swine and dogs in Italy.

Spigaglia P(1), Drigo I(2), Barbanti F(3), Mastrantonio P(3), Bano L(2), Bacchin 
C(2), Puiatti C(2), Tonon E(2), Berto G(2), Agnoletti F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-mediated Diseases, Istituto 
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: patrizia.spigaglia@iss.it.
(2)Special Bacteriology Laboratory, Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle 
Venezie, Treviso, Italy.
(3)Department of Infectious, Parasitic and Immune-mediated Diseases, Istituto 
Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Recent studies suggest animals, in particular farm and companion animals, as 
possible reservoir for Clostridium difficile human pathogenic strains. The aim 
of this study was to give a first characterization of C. difficile isolates from 
Italian swine and dogs. In total, 10 different PCR-ribotypes were identified 
among porcine strains and six among canine strains. The predominant type found 
among porcine strains was 078 (50%), whereas the most frequently detected among 
canine strains was the non-toxinogenic 010 (64%). Considering the CLSI 
breakpoints, 60% of porcine isolates was resistant to ERY, 35% to MXF, 15% to 
CLI, 5% to RIF, and none to MTZ or VAN. Among dogs, 51% of strains was resistant 
to CLI, 46% to ERY, 21% to MTZ and 5% to MXF or RIF, and none to VAN. Five 
porcine strains (10%) and 9 canine isolates (41%) were MDR. Interestingly, 8 MDR 
canine strains were highly resistant to MTZ, with MICs ≥32 mg/L. Considering the 
EUCAST cut-off for MTZ (MIC >2 mg/L), 13 canine isolates and one porcine strain 
were found with reduced susceptibility to MTZ (MICs ranging from 3 to 
≥256 mg/L). Swine and canine strains showing resistance or reduced 
susceptibility to MTZ belonged to PCR-ribotype 010 and 078. These PCR-ribotypes 
have been associated to reduced susceptibility to MTZ also in human, suggesting 
a potential risk for the emergence of C. difficile strains resistant to the 
current first-line antibiotic for CDI treatment. The agar incorporation method 
(AIM) was confirmed as the best method to detect C. difficile strains with this 
phenotype also after strains manipulations. The results obtained add further 
evidences about the possible role of animals as source of MDR C. difficile 
strains and reservoir of antibiotic resistance determinants.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2014.10.003
PMID: 25316022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Mar 27;62(4):e02157-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.02157-17. Print 2018 Apr.

In Vitro and In Vivo Activities of DS-2969b, a Novel GyrB Inhibitor, against 
Clostridium difficile.

Mathur T(#)(1), Barman TK(#)(1), Kumar M(#)(1), Singh D(1), Kumar R(1), Khera 
MK(2), Yamada M(3), Inoue SI(3), Upadhyay DJ(1), Masuda N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Daiichi Sankyo India Pharma Private Limited, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India.
(2)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Daiichi Sankyo India Pharma Private 
Limited, Gurgaon, Haryana, India.
(3)Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Daiichi Sankyo India Pharma Private Limited, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India masuda.nobuhisa.up@daiichisankyo.co.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

DS-2969b is a novel GyrB inhibitor that is currently under clinical development 
for the treatment of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). In this study, the 
in vitro and in vivo activities of DS-2969b were evaluated. DS-2969b inhibited 
the supercoiling activity of C. difficile DNA gyrase. DS-2969b showed potent in 
vitro activity against C. difficile clinical isolates with a MIC90 of 0.06 
μg/ml, which was 2-, 32-, and 16-fold lower than the MIC90s of fidaxomicin, 
vancomycin, and metronidazole, respectively. DS-2969b did not select 
spontaneously resistant mutants of various C. difficile strains at 4× MIC, and 
the frequency of resistance development was less than 4.8 × 10-9 In a hamster 
CDI model, 5-day oral administration of DS-2969b conferred complete protection 
from recurrence and mortality at 0.3 mg/kg of body weight once a day, in 
contrast to a 50% survival rate with fidaxomicin at 3 mg/kg once a day and 0% 
with vancomycin at a 50-mg/kg/dose twice a day. Even a single oral 
administration of 1 mg/kg of DS-2969b in the CDI model exhibited 100% animal 
survival without recurrence. DS-2969b was also efficacious by 5-day subcutaneous 
administration in the CDI model. DS-2969b showed similar levels of fecal 
excretion after intravenous and oral administrations in rats. These data support 
further development of DS-2969b as a drug for oral and intravenous treatment of 
CDI.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02157-17
PMCID: PMC5913969
PMID: 29439962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Front Microbiol. 2018 Oct 9;9:2396. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02396. eCollection 
2018.

Protective Effect of Pediococcus pentosaceus LI05 Against Clostridium difficile 
Infection in a Mouse Model.

Xu Q(1), Gu S(1), Chen Y(1), Quan J(1), Lv L(1), Chen D(1), Zheng B(1), Xu L(1), 
Li L(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, China.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major cause of infectious diarrhea 
among hospitalized patients. Probiotics could be instrumental in restoring the 
intestinal dysbiosis caused by CDI. Here, we examined the protective effect of 
Pediococcus pentosaceus LI05 in a mouse CDI model. C57BL/6 mice were 
administrated P. pentosaceus LI05 (LI05 group) or sterile anaerobic PBS (CDI 
group) everyday for 14 days. Mice were exposed to antibiotics cocktail for 5 
days; then challenged with C. difficile strain VPI10463. Mice were monitored 
daily for survival and weight loss. Colonic tissue and serum samples were 
assessed for intestinal histopathology, intestinal barrier function and systemic 
inflammation. The oral administration of P. pentosaceus LI05 improved the 
survival rate and alleviated the histopathological impact of C. difficile. 
Compared to the CDI group, the levels of inflammatory mediators in the colon as 
well as inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in serum were substantially 
attenuated in the LI05 group. P. pentosaceus LI05 alleviated the CDI-induced of 
disruption of ZO-1, occludin and claudin-1. Additionally, fecal microbiome 
analysis showed an enrichment in the abundance of the Porphyromonadaceae and 
Rikenellaceae, while, the relative abundance of Enterobacteriaceae were 
decreased. Our results demonstrated that the preventive effect of P. pentosaceus 
LI05 against CDI was mediated via improving tight junction proteins and 
down-regulating the inflammatory response. Therefore, P. pentosaceus LI05 could 
be a promising probiotic in CDI.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02396
PMCID: PMC6189400
PMID: 30356740


143. J Clin Microbiol. 2015 Apr;53(4):1216-26. doi: 10.1128/JCM.03058-14. Epub 2015 
Feb 4.

Emergence of an outbreak-associated Clostridium difficile variant with increased 
virulence.

Quesada-Gómez C(1), López-Ureña D(1), Acuña-Amador L(1), Villalobos-Zúñiga M(2), 
Du T(3), Freire R(4), Guzmán-Verri C(5), del Mar Gamboa-Coronado M(1), Lawley 
TD(6), Moreno E(7), Mulvey MR(3), de Castro Brito GA(4), Rodríguez-Cavallini 
E(1), Rodríguez C(1), Chaves-Olarte E(8).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica.
(2)Hospital San Juan de Dios, CCSS, San José, Costa Rica.
(3)National Microbiology Laboratory, Public Health Agency of Canada, Winnipeg, 
Manitoba, Canada.
(4)Departamento de Morfologia, Universidade Federal do Ceará, Fortaleza, Brazil.
(5)Programa de Investigación en Enfermedades Tropicales, Escuela de Medicina 
Veterinaria, Universidad Nacional, Heredia, Costa Rica.
(6)Host-Microbiota Interactions Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Hinxton, United Kingdom.
(7)Programa de Investigación en Enfermedades Tropicales, Escuela de Medicina 
Veterinaria, Universidad Nacional, Heredia, Costa Rica Instituto Clodomiro 
Picado, Universidad de Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica.
(8)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica 
esteban.chaves@ucr.ac.cr.

The prevalence of Clostridium difficile infections has increased due to the 
emergence of epidemic variants from diverse genetic lineages. Here we describe 
the emergence of a novel variant during an outbreak in a Costa Rican hospital 
that was associated with severe clinical presentations. This C. difficile 
variant elicited higher white blood cell counts and caused disease in younger 
patients than did other strains isolated during the outbreak. Furthermore, it 
had a recurrence rate, a 30-day attributable disease rate, and disease severity 
as great as those of the epidemic strain NAP1. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
genotyping indicated that the outbreak strains belong to a previously 
undescribed variant, designated NAPCR1. Whole-genome sequencing and ribotyping 
indicated that the NAPCR1 variant belongs to C. difficile ribotype 012 and 
sequence type 54, as does the reference strain 630. NAPCR1 strains are resistant 
to fluoroquinolones due to a mutation in gyrA, and they possess an 18-bp 
deletion in tcdC that is characteristic of the epidemic, evolutionarily 
distinct, C. difficile NAP1 variant. NAPCR1 genomes contain 10% more predicted 
genes than strain 630, most of which are of hypothetical function and are 
present on phages and other mobile genetic elements. The increased virulence of 
NAPCR1 was confirmed by mortality rates in the hamster model and strong 
inflammatory responses induced by bacteria-free supernatants in the murine 
ligated loop model. However, NAPCR1 strains do not synthesize toxin A and toxin 
B at levels comparable to those in NAP1 strains. Our results suggest that the 
pathogenic potential of this emerging C. difficile variant is due to the 
acquisition of hypothetical functions associated with laterally acquired DNA.

Copyright © 2015, Quesada-Gómez et al.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.03058-14
PMCID: PMC4365207
PMID: 25653402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Infect Immun. 2018 Jul 23;86(8):e00095-18. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00095-18. Print 2018 
Aug.

TPL2 Is a Key Regulator of Intestinal Inflammation in Clostridium difficile 
Infection.

Wang Y(#)(1)(2), Wang S(#)(1), Kelly CP(3), Feng H(4), Greenberg A(5), Sun X(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani School of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA.
(2)Tufts University Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, School of Dentistry, University of 
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)Obesity and Metabolism Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research 
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani School of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, USA sun5@health.usf.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Tumor progression locus 2 (TPL2), a serine/threonine protein kinase, is a major 
inflammatory mediator in immune cells. The predominant inflammatory actions of 
TPL2 depend on the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and 
the upregulated production of the cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) 
and interleukin 1β (IL-1β) in macrophages and dendritic cells in response to 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Significant increases in TNF-α, IL-6, IL-β, and IL-8 
levels in patients with Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) have been 
reported. Both TNF-α and IL-6 have been postulated to play key roles in the 
systemic inflammatory response in CDI, and IL-8 is essential for the development 
of local intestinal inflammatory responses in CDI. The objective of this study 
was to elucidate the role of TPL2 in the pathogenesis of CDI. We found that TPL2 
was significantly activated in human and mouse intestinal tissues upon C. 
difficile toxin exposure or CDI. We further demonstrated that TPL2 knockout 
(TPL2-KO) mice were significantly more resistant to CDI than wild-type mice, 
with significantly reduced production of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, KC (a mouse 
homologue of IL-8), and myeloperoxidase (MPO) in the ceca and colons of TPL2-KO 
mice. Finally, we found that TPL2 inhibition by a specific inhibitor or TPL2 
gene ablation significantly reduced TcdB-induced production of TNF-α, IL-6, 
IL-β, and KC by inhibiting the activation of p38, extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase (ERK), and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). Taken together, our data 
suggest that TPL2 represents a potential therapeutic target for CDI treatment.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00095-18
PMCID: PMC6056850
PMID: 29844241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Apr;80(8):2555-63. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00237-14. Epub 
2014 Feb 14.

Characterization of temperate phages infecting Clostridium difficile isolates of 
human and animal origins.

Sekulovic O(1), Garneau JR, Néron A, Fortier LC.

Author information:
(1)Département de Microbiologie et d'Infectiologie, Faculté de Médecine et des 
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive pathogen infecting humans and animals. 
Recent studies suggest that animals could represent potential reservoirs of C. 
difficile that could then transfer to humans. Temperate phages contribute to the 
evolution of most bacteria, for example, by promoting the transduction of 
virulence, fitness, and antibiotic resistance genes. In C. difficile, little is 
known about their role, mainly because suitable propagating hosts and conditions 
are lacking. Here we report the isolation, propagation, and preliminary 
characterization of nine temperate phages from animal and human C. difficile 
isolates. Prophages were induced by UV light from 58 C. difficile isolates of 
animal and human origins. Using soft agar overlays with 27 different C. 
difficile test strains, we isolated and further propagated nine temperate 
phages: two from horse isolates (ΦCD481-1 and ΦCD481-2), three from dog isolates 
(ΦCD505, ΦCD506, and ΦCD508), and four from human isolates (ΦCD24-2, ΦCD111, 
ΦCD146, and ΦCD526). Two phages are members of the Siphoviridae family (ΦCD111 
and ΦCD146), while the others are Myoviridae phages. Pulsed-field gel 
electrophoresis and restriction enzyme analyses showed that all of the phages 
had unique double-stranded DNA genomes of 30 to 60 kb. Phages induced from human 
C. difficile isolates, especially the members of the Siphoviridae family, had a 
broader host range than phages from animal C. difficile isolates. Nevertheless, 
most of the phages could infect both human and animal strains. Phage 
transduction of antibiotic resistance was recently reported in C. difficile. Our 
findings therefore call for further investigation of the potential risk of 
transduction between animal and human C. difficile isolates.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00237-14
PMCID: PMC3993186
PMID: 24532062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. BMC Vet Res. 2019 Jan 7;15(1):11. doi: 10.1186/s12917-018-1754-z.

Oral faecal microbiota transplantation for the treatment of Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhoea in a dog: a case report.

Sugita K(1)(2), Yanuma N(1), Ohno H(1), Takahashi K(1), Kawano K(3), Morita 
H(4), Ohmori K(5).

Author information:
(1)Cooperative Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Agriculture, Tokyo 
University of Agriculture and Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwaicho, Fuchu, Tokyo, 
183-8509, Japan.
(2)Sugita Animal Hospital, 3-55-10 Shinshiraoka, Shiraoka, Saitama, 349-0212, 
Japan.
(3)Primo Animal Hospital Tokyo Animal Allergy Medical Center, 1-28-7 
Shakujiimachi, Nerima, Tokyo, 177-0041, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Environmental and Life Science, Okayama University, 1-1-1 
Tsushimanaka, Kita, Okayama, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.
(5)Cooperative Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Agriculture, Tokyo 
University of Agriculture and Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwaicho, Fuchu, Tokyo, 
183-8509, Japan. k-ohmori@cc.tuat.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Successful clinical outcomes of faecal microbiota transplantation 
(FMT) for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection have been reported in humans 
and a marmoset. However, it has been unclear whether oral FMT was effective for 
the treatment of C. difficile-associated diarrhoea in dogs.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 8-month-old, intact male French bulldog was presented with 
a 4-month history of intermittent large bowel diarrhoea. Physical and clinical 
examinations did not identify any specific causes for diarrhoea. Real-time PCR 
analysis and immunochromatography detected C. difficile antigen and toxin A&B 
genes and proteins in a faecal sample. Based on these findings, diarrhoea in the 
dog was considered to be induced by C. difficile-associated colitis. The dog was 
treated with oral FMT, in which a faecal solution obtained from a healthy beagle 
was orally administered to the subject. Stool consistency and frequency and 
faecal blood and mucus became normal 2-3 days after oral FMT, and real-time PCR 
analysis and immunochromatography was negative for C. difficile antigen and 
toxin A&B genes and proteins. No adverse events were observed.
CONCLUSION: The present case report demonstrated that oral FMT was an effective 
treatment for C. difficile-associated diarrhoea in a dog. The findings in this 
report provide a rationale to evaluate clinical efficacy of oral FMT for other 
gastrointestinal diseases in dogs.

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-018-1754-z
PMCID: PMC6322325
PMID: 30616615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL: This study was approved by the 
Research Ethics Committee of Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology 
(0016018). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Written informed consent for publication of 
the clinical details was obtained from the owner of the dog. COMPETING 
INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. 
PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.


147. PLoS One. 2017 Dec 29;12(12):e0189183. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189183. 
eCollection 2017.

Ribotype 078 Clostridium difficile infection incidence in Dutch hospitals is not 
associated with provincial pig farming: Results from a national sentinel 
surveillance, 2009-2015.

van Dorp SM(1), de Greeff SC(2), Harmanus C(1), Sanders IMJG(1), Dekkers OM(3), 
Knetsch CW(1), Kampinga GA(4), Notermans DW(2), Kuijper EJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(2)Centre for Infectious Disease Control, the National Institute for Public 
Health and the Environment (RIVM), Bilthoven, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Groningen, University 
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that the high incidence of ribotype 078 
Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) in the Netherlands is related to pig 
farming.
METHODS: We used data of hospitalised CDI patients (>2yrs of age) diagnosed 
between May 2009 and May 2015 in 26 hospitals participating in a national 
sentinel surveillance. We compared clinical and geographical characteristics of 
078 CDI to other CDI. We investigated the association between 078 CDI incidence 
and four indicators of pig farming (piglet, pig, piglet farm and pig farm 
density) by mixed-effects Poisson regression. We used a space-time permutation 
model to search for community-onset 078 CDI clusters (using SaTScan).
RESULTS: A total of 4,691 CDI were identified. Ribotype 078 was isolated in 493 
of 3,756 patients (13.1%) including a typing result. These patients had slightly 
higher community-onset disease and a 35% increase of 30-day mortality compared 
to non-078 CDI patients. The pooled overall and 078 incidence rates were 2.82 
(95% CI, 2.42-3.29) and 0.26 (95% CI, 0.21-0.31) CDI per 10,000 patients-days 
respectively. Hospital 078 CDI incidence was not associated with provincial pig 
(IRR, 0.98; 95% CI, 0.89-1.08), piglet (IRR, 0.95; 95% CI, 0.75-1.19), pig farm 
(IRR, 1.08; 95% CI, 0.84-1.39), or piglet farm density (IRR, 1.00; 95% CI, 
0.56-1.79). No clusters of community-onset ribotype 078 CDI were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results do not indicate that the ribotype 078 CDI incidence in 
hospitals is related to pig (farm) or piglet (farm) density. However, 
transmission beyond provincial borders or in non-hospitalised patients cannot be 
excluded.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0189183
PMCID: PMC5747436
PMID: 29287077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: EK has received grants from 
Netherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMw), and the 
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC); consulting fees or 
honaria from Astellas, MSD, and Valneva; consultancy fees from Vedanta, board 
membership fees from MSD and Valneva. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials. Other co-authors have no potential 
conflicts of interest to disclose.


148. Vet Q. 2002 Dec;24(4):203-19. doi: 10.1080/01652176.2002.9695137.

Clostridium difficile infections in animals with special reference to the horse. 
A review.

Båverud V(1).

Author information:
(1)National Veterinary Institute, Department of Bacteriology, Uppsala, Sweden. 
Viveca.Baverud@sva.se

In human medicine, Clostridium (C.) difficile is since many years a well-known 
cause of nosocomial diarrhea induced by antibiotic treatment. In horses, C. 
difficile was recently suggested as a possible enteric pathogen. The bacterium 
is associated with acute colitis in mature horses following treatment with 
antibiotics. C. difficile, and/or its cytotoxin, is also associated with acute 
colitis in mares when their foals are being treated with erythromycin and 
rifampicin for Rhodococcus equi pneumonia. The colitis can have resulted from an 
accidental ingestion of erythromycin by the mares. In an experimental study it 
was also demonstrated in mature horses that erythromycin can induce severe 
colitis associated with proliferation of C. difficile. A new interesting finding 
was that in healthy foals younger than 14 days, C. difficile was isolated from 
every third foal whereas older foals proved negative. In this paper the current 
state of knowledge of C. difficile infections in animals, especially in horses, 
is reviewed. A short description is given of the historical background of 
Clostridium difficile and the antibiotic-associated colitis and diarrhea caused 
by infection with this bacterium. The taxonomy of Clostridium difficile is 
described extensively. A summary is given of the diseases associated with 
clostridia infections in animals. Special attention is paid to the pathogenesis, 
epidemiology, clinical symptoms, laboratory diagnosis, and pathology of 
Clostridium difficile infections in horses. Finally, some other bacterial causes 
of colitis in horses are discussed shortly.

DOI: 10.1080/01652176.2002.9695137
PMID: 12540137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Front Microbiol. 2018 Mar 16;9:415. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00415. eCollection 
2018.

Mutacin 1140 Lantibiotic Variants Are Efficacious Against Clostridium difficile 
Infection.

Kers JA(1), Sharp RE(1), Defusco AW(2), Park JH(2), Xu J(3), Pulse ME(4), Weiss 
WJ(4), Handfield M(2).

Author information:
(1)Industrial Products Division, Intrexon Corp., South San Francisco, CA, United 
States.
(2)Oragenics, Inc., Tampa, FL, United States.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA, 
United States.
(4)PreClinical Services, UNT System College of Pharmacy, Fort Worth, TX, United 
States.

Lantibiotics offer an untapped pipeline for the development of novel antibiotics 
to treat serious Gram-positive (+) infections including Clostridium difficile. 
Mutacin 1140 (MU1140) is a lantibiotic produced by Streptococcus mutans and acts 
via a novel mechanism of action, which may limit the development of resistance. 
This study sought to identify a lead compound for the treatment of C. difficile 
associated diarrhea (CDAD). Compounds were selected from a saturation 
mutagenesis library of 418 single amino acid variants of MU1140. Compounds were 
produced by small scale fermentation, purified, characterized and then subjected 
to a panel of assays aimed at identifying the best performers. The screening 
assays included: in vitro susceptibility testing [MIC against Micrococcus 
luteus, Clostridium difficile, vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), 
Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumonia, Mycobacterium phlei, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa; cytotoxicity screening on HepG2 hepatocytes; in vitro 
pharmacological profiling with the Safety Screen 44TM, metabolic and chemical 
stability in biologically relevant fluids (FaSSGF, FaSSIF and serum); and 
efficacy in vivo]. Several lantibiotic compounds had better MIC against C. 
difficile, compared to vancomycin, but not against other bacterial species 
tested. The Safety Screen 44TMin vitro pharmacological profiling assay suggested 
that this class of compounds has relatively low overall toxicity and that 
compound OG253 (MU1140, Phe1Ile) is not likely to present inadvertent off-target 
effects, as evidenced by a low promiscuity score. The in vitro cytotoxicity 
assay also indicated that this class of compounds was characterized by low 
toxicity; the EC50 of OG253 was 636 mg/mL on HepG2 cells. The half-life in 
simulated gastric fluid was >240 min. for all compound tested. The stability in 
simulated intestinal fluid ranged between a half-life of 5 min to >240 min, and 
paralleled the half-life in serum. OG253 ultimately emerged as the lead compound 
based on superior in vivo efficacy along with an apparent lack of relapse in a 
hamster model of infection. The lessons learned from this report are applicable 
to therapeutic lanthipeptides in general and may assist in the design of novel 
molecules with improved pharmacological, therapeutic and physicochemical 
profiles. The data presented also support the continued clinical development of 
OG253 as a novel antibiotic against CDAD that could prevent recurrence of the 
infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00415
PMCID: PMC5864910
PMID: 29615987


150. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2018 Apr 1;73(4):973-980. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkx486.

Characterization of the impact of rpoB mutations on the in vitro and in vivo 
competitive fitness of Clostridium difficile and susceptibility to fidaxomicin.

Kuehne SA(1)(2)(3), Dempster AW(1), Collery MM(1), Joshi N(1), Jowett J(1), 
Kelly ML(1), Cave R(1), Longshaw CM(4), Minton NP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clostridia Research Group, BBSRC/EPSRC Synthetic Biology Research Centre 
(SBRC), School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(2)Gastrointestinal and Liver Disorders Theme of the NIHR Nottingham Biomedical 
Research Centre (BRC), Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust and University 
of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(3)School of Dentistry, Institute of Clinical Sciences, College of Medical and 
Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(4)Astellas Pharma Europe Ltd, Chertsey, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To establish the role of specific, non-synonymous SNPs in the RNA 
polymerase β subunit (rpoB) gene in reducing the susceptibility of Clostridium 
difficile to fidaxomicin and to explore the potential in vivo significance of 
rpoB mutant strains.
METHODS: Allelic exchange was used to introduce three different SNPs into the 
rpoB gene of an erythromycin-resistant derivative (CRG20291) of C. difficile 
R20291. The genome sequences of the created mutants were determined and each 
mutant analysed with respect to growth and sporulation rates, toxin A/B 
production and cytotoxicity against Vero cells, and in competition assays. Their 
comparative virulence and colonization ability was also assessed in a hamster 
infection model.
RESULTS: The MIC of fidaxomicin displayed by three mutants CRG20291-TA, 
CRG20291-TG and CRG20291-GT was substantially increased (>32, 8 and 2 mg/L, 
respectively) relative to that of the parent strain (0.25 mg/L). Genome 
sequencing established that the intended mutagenic substitutions in rpoB were 
the only changes present. Relative to CRG20291, all mutants had attenuated 
growth, were outcompeted by the parental strain, had lower sporulation and toxin 
A/B production capacities, and displayed diminished cytotoxicity. In a hamster 
model, virulence of all three mutants was significantly reduced compared with 
the progenitor strain, whereas the degree of caecum colonization was unaltered.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that particular SNPs in rpoB lead to reduced 
fidaxomicin susceptibility. These mutations were associated with a fitness cost 
in vitro and reduced virulence in vivo.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkx486
PMCID: PMC5890677
PMID: 29253242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2012 Aug;18(8):778-84. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03651.x. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Clostridium difficile in Dutch animals: their presence, characteristics and 
similarities with human isolates.

Koene MG(1), Mevius D, Wagenaar JA, Harmanus C, Hensgens MP, Meetsma AM, 
Putirulan FF, van Bergen MA, Kuijper EJ.

Author information:
(1)Central Veterinary Institute of Wageningen UR, Lelystad, The Netherlands. 
miriam.koene@wur.nl

The presence and characteristics of Clostridium difficile were investigated in 
839 faecal samples from seven different animal species in the Netherlands. The 
number of positive samples ranged from 3.4% (cattle) to 25.0% (dogs). Twenty-two 
different PCR ribotypes were identified. Among 96 isolates, 53% harboured toxin 
genes. All C. difficile isolates from pigs, cattle and poultry were toxinogenic, 
whereas the majority of isolates from pet animals consisted of non-toxinogenic 
PCR ribotypes 010 and 039. Ribotype 012 was most prevalent in cattle and 
ribotype 078 in pigs. No predominant ribotypes were present in horse and poultry 
samples. Overall, PCR ribotypes 012, 014 and 078 were the most frequently 
recovered toxinogenic ribotypes from animal samples. Comparison with human 
isolates from the Dutch Reference Laboratory for C. difficile at Leiden 
University Medical Centre (LUMC) showed that these types were also recovered 
from human hospitalized patients in 2009/2010, encompassing 0.8%, 11.4% and 9.8% 
of all isolates, respectively. Application of multiple-locus variable-number 
tandem-repeat analysis indicated a genotypic relation of animal and human 
ribotype 078 strains, but a clear genotypic distinction for ribotypes 012 and 
014. We conclude that toxinogenic C. difficile PCR ribotypes found in animals 
correspond to PCR ribotypes associated with human disease in hospitalized 
patients in the Netherlands. Contrary to PCR ribotype 078, significant genetic 
differences were observed between animal and human PCR ribotype 012 and 014 
isolates.

© 2011 The Authors. Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2011 European Society 
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2011.03651.x
PMID: 21919997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2011 Oct;63(1):73-81. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2011.00832.x. Epub 2011 Jul 20.

Immunization of hamsters against Clostridium difficile infection using the Cwp84 
protease as an antigen.

Péchiné S(1), Denève C, Le Monnier A, Hoys S, Janoir C, Collignon A.

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris-Sud 11, Faculté de Pharmacie, EA 4043, USC INRA, 
Châtenay-Malabry, France. severine.pechine@u-psud.fr

Clostridium difficile is a pathogen responsible for diarrhoea and colitis, 
particularly after antibiotic treatment. We evaluated the C. difficile protease 
Cwp84, found to be associated with the S-layer proteins, as a vaccine antigen to 
limit the C. difficile intestinal colonization and therefore the development of 
the infection in a clindamycin-treated hamster model. First, we evaluated the 
immune response and the animal protection against death induced by several 
immunization routes: rectal, intragastric and subcutaneous. Antibody production 
was variable according to the immunization routes. In addition, serum Cwp84 
antibody titres did not always correlate with animal protection after challenge 
with a toxigenic C. difficile strain. The best survival rate was observed with 
the rectal route of immunization. Then, in a second assay, we selected this 
immunization route to perform a larger immunization assay including a Cwp84 
immunized group and a control group. Clostridium difficile intestinal 
colonization and survival rate, as well as the immune response were examined. 
Clostridium difficile hamster challenge resulted in a 26% weaker and slower C. 
difficile intestinal colonization in the immunized group. Furthermore, hamster 
survival in the Cwp84 immunized group was 33% greater than that of the control 
group, with a significant statistical difference.

© 2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2011.00832.x
PMID: 21707776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003523. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003523. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

Clostridium difficile 027/BI/NAP1 encodes a hypertoxic and antigenically 
variable form of TcdB.

Lanis JM(1), Heinlen LD, James JA, Ballard JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, United States of America.

The Clostridium difficile exotoxin, TcdB, which is a major virulence factor, 
varies between strains of this pathogen. Herein, we show that TcdB from the 
epidemic BI/NAP1/027 strain of C. difficile is more lethal, causes more 
extensive brain hemorrhage, and is antigenically variable from TcdB produced by 
previously studied strains of this pathogen (TcdB003). In mouse intoxication 
assays, TcdB from a ribotype 027 strain (TcdB027) was at least four fold more 
lethal than TcdB003. TcdB027 caused a previously undescribed brain hemorrhage in 
mice and this correlated with a heightened sensitivity of brain microvascular 
endothelial cells to the toxin. TcdB003 and TcdB027 also differed in their 
antigenic profiles and did not share cross-neutralizing epitopes in a major 
immunogenic region of the protein. Solid phase humoral mapping of epitopes in 
the carboxy-terminal domains (CTD) of TcdB027 and TcdB003 identified 11 reactive 
epitopes that varied between the two forms of TcdB, and 13 epitopes that were 
shared or overlapping. Despite the epitope differences and absence of 
neutralizing epitopes in the CTD of TcdB027, a toxoid form of this toxin primed 
a strong protective response. These findings indicate TcdB027 is a more potent 
toxin than TcdB003 as measured by lethality assays and pathology, moreover the 
sequence differences between the two forms of TcdB alter antigenic epitopes and 
reduce cross-neutralization by antibodies targeting the CTD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003523
PMCID: PMC3731247
PMID: 23935501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


154. Am J Clin Nutr. 1979 Jan;32(1):244-50. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/32.1.244.

Clindamycin-induced colitis.

Fekety R, Silva J, Browne RA, Rifkin GD, Ebright JR.

The hamster model of enterocolitis after the administration of clindamycin was 
used to study various drugs used in treatment of the disease in humans. Current 
evidence strongly suggests toxigenic, clindamycin-resistant Clostridium 
difficile is a cause of the disease in hamster and man. This organism is 
susceptible to vancomycin and metronidazole, and the disease could be prevented 
in the hamster so long as the antibiotics were given orally. A fatal colitis 
almost invariably ensued once they were discontinued. Administration of 
cholestyramine significantly prolonged survival of hamsters, but did not pervent 
death or colitis. Corticosteroids or atropine-diphenoxylate (Lomotil) did not 
alter the disease. The hamster model may be useful in studying other kinds of 
treatment of this disease.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/32.1.244
PMID: 760500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Nov;57(11):5266-70. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00580-13. 
Epub 2013 Aug 12.

Nontoxigenic Clostridium difficile protects hamsters against challenge with 
historic and epidemic strains of toxigenic BI/NAP1/027 C. difficile.

Nagaro KJ(1), Phillips ST, Cheknis AK, Sambol SP, Zukowski WE, Johnson S, 
Gerding DN.

Author information:
(1)Hines VA Hospital, Hines, Illinois, USA.

Nontoxigenic Clostridium difficile (NTCD) has been shown to prevent fatal C. 
difficile infection in the hamster model when hamsters are challenged with 
standard toxigenic C. difficile strains. The purpose of this study was to 
determine if NTCD can prevent C. difficile infection in the hamster model when 
hamsters are challenged with restriction endonuclease analysis group BI C. 
difficile strains. Groups of 10 hamsters were given oral clindamycin, followed 
on day 2 by 10(6) CFU of spores of NTCD strain M3 or T7, and were challenged on 
day 5 with 100 CFU of spores of BI1 or BI6. To conserve animals, results for 
control hamsters challenged with BI1 or BI6 from the present study and controls 
from previous identical experiments were combined for statistical comparisons. 
NTCD strains M3 and T7 achieved 100% colonization and were 100% protective 
against challenge with BI1 (P ≤ 0.001). M3 colonized 9/10 hamsters and protected 
against BI6 challenge in the colonized hamsters (P = 0.0003). T7 colonized 10/10 
hamsters, but following BI6 challenge, cocolonization occurred in 5 hamsters, 4 
of which died, for protection of 6/10 animals (P = 0.02). NTCD colonization 
provides protection against challenge with toxigenic BI group strains. M3 is 
more effective than T7 in preventing C. difficile infection caused by the BI6 
epidemic strain. Prevention of C. difficile infection caused by the epidemic BI6 
strain may be more challenging than that of infections caused by historic BI1 
and non-BI C. difficile strains.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00580-13
PMCID: PMC3811292
PMID: 23939887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Apr 26;62(5):e00107-18. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00107-18. Print 2018 May.

Treatment of Clostridium difficile Infection with a Small-Molecule Inhibitor of 
Toxin UDP-Glucose Hydrolysis Activity.

Stroke IL(#)(1), Letourneau JJ(#)(1), Miller TE(2), Xu Y(3), Pechik I(1), Savoly 
DR(1), Ma L(1), Sturzenbecker LJ(1), Sabalski J(1), Stein PD(1), Webb ML(1), 
Hilbert DW(4).

Author information:
(1)Venenum Biodesign, Hamilton, New Jersey, USA.
(2)Femeris Women's Health Research Center, Hamilton, New Jersey, USA.
(3)Invivotek, Hamilton, New Jersey, USA.
(4)Femeris Women's Health Research Center, Hamilton, New Jersey, USA 
dhilbert@mdlab.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the leading cause of hospital-acquired 
infectious diarrhea, with significant morbidity, mortality, and associated 
health care costs. The major risk factor for CDI is antimicrobial therapy, which 
disrupts the normal gut microbiota and allows C. difficile to flourish. 
Treatment of CDI with antimicrobials is generally effective in the short term, 
but recurrent infections are frequent and problematic, indicating that improved 
treatment options are necessary. Symptoms of disease are largely due to two 
homologous toxins, TcdA and TcdB, which are glucosyltransferases that inhibit 
host Rho GTPases. As the normal gut microbiota is an important component of 
resistance to CDI, our goal was to develop an effective nonantimicrobial 
therapy. Here, we report a highly potent small-molecule inhibitor (VB-82252) of 
TcdA and TcdB. This compound inhibits the UDP-glucose hydrolysis activity of 
TcdB and protects cells from intoxication after challenge with either toxin. 
Oral dosing of the inhibitor prevented inflammation in a murine intrarectal 
toxin challenge model. In a murine model of recurrent CDI, the inhibitor reduced 
weight loss and gut inflammation during acute disease and did not cause the 
recurrent disease that was observed with vancomycin treatment. Lastly, the 
inhibitor demonstrated efficacy similar to that of vancomycin in a hamster 
disease model. Overall, these results demonstrate that small-molecule inhibition 
of C. difficile toxin UDP-glucose hydrolysis activity is a promising 
nonantimicrobial approach to the treatment of CDI.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00107-18
PMCID: PMC5923158
PMID: 29483125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2016 Jun;49(3):445-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmii.2015.05.012. Epub 2015 Jun 27.

Isolation and quantitation of Clostridium difficile in aqueous and fecal matter 
using two types of selective media.

Housman ST(1), Banevicius MA(1), Lamb LM(1), Nicolau DP(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Anti-Infective Research and Development, Hartford Hospital, 
Hartford, CT, USA.
(2)Center for Anti-Infective Research and Development, Hartford Hospital, 
Hartford, CT, USA; Division of Infectious Diseases, Hartford Hospital, Hartford, 
CT, USA. Electronic address: david.nicolau@hhchealth.org.

We evaluated the isolation and quantitation of Clostridium difficile from 
aqueous and fecal samples utilizing ChromID CDIF and cycloserine, cefoxitin, and 
fructose-containing agar with horse blood and taurocholate media. Growth was 
similar between the two. ChromID CDIF provided enhanced isolation and required 
no ethanol pretreatment to inhibit normal flora. ChromID CDIF also improved 
turn-around time, requiring only 24 hours' incubation.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmii.2015.05.012
PMID: 26198865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Infect Dis. 2015 Aug 15;212(4):654-63. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiv184. Epub 2015 
Mar 24.

Proton-Pump Inhibitor Exposure Aggravates Clostridium difficile-Associated 
Colitis: Evidence From a Mouse Model.

Hung YP(1), Ko WC(2), Chou PH(3), Chen YH(3), Lin HJ(1), Liu YH(3), Tsai HW(4), 
Lee JC(5), Tsai PJ(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tainan Hospital, Ministry of Health and 
Welfare Department of Internal Medicine Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
National Health Research Institutes, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine Center for Infection Control, National Cheng 
Kung University Hospital Department of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University 
Medical College.
(3)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology.
(4)Department of Pathology.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine.
(6)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology Center of 
Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung University.

Erratum in
    J Infect Dis. 2020 Jan 1;221(1):168.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile is currently the leading cause of infectious 
diarrhea in hospitalized patients. In addition to the infection due to toxigenic 
C. difficile in the gastrointestinal tract of susceptible hosts, other 
predisposing factors for C. difficile infection (CDI) are identified, including 
advanced age, a prolonged hospital stay, and use of acid-suppressive drugs. Of 
note, exposure to gastric acid-reducing agents, such as H2 blockers and proton 
pump inhibitors (PPIs), remains a controversial risk factor, and has been 
associated with CDI in some studies but not in others. A mouse model of 
antibiotic-associated clostridial colitis was established to examine the role of 
PPIs for CDI.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A mouse model of antibiotic-associated clostridial 
colitis was set up. NF-κB reporter mice were used to address the in vivo spatial 
and temporal inflammatory patterns of C. difficile-associated colitis. Serum 
levels of lipopolysaccharide and dextran-FITC were measured to reflect the 
barrier permeability of affected intestines.
RESULTS: Mice with CDI that were exposed to PPI exhibited greater losses of 
stool consistency and body and cecal weights than those that were not exposed to 
PPI. Further, more neutrophilic infiltrations, epithelial damage, and 
inflammatory cytokine expression were noted in colon specimens of the mice with 
PPI exposure. More-evident inflammatory responses were detected by in vivo 
imaging of NF-κB reporter mice with CDI that were exposed to PPI. Gut barrier 
permeability was increased to a greater extent, as reflected by higher serum 
levels of lipopolysaccharide and dextran-FITC in mice with CDI that were exposed 
to PPI.
CONCLUSIONS: Our mouse model demonstrates that PPI exposure increases the 
severity of intestinal inflammation in mice with C. difficile-associated 
colitis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiv184
PMID: 25805751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2017 Aug 14;7:365. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00365. 
eCollection 2017.

Characterization of Chicken IgY Specific to Clostridium difficile R20291 Spores 
and the Effect of Oral Administration in Mouse Models of Initiation and 
Recurrent Disease.

Pizarro-Guajardo M(1), Díaz-González F(1), Álvarez-Lobos M(2), Paredes-Sabja 
D(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biologicas, Universidad Andres BelloSantiago, Chile.
(2)Departamento de Gastroenterología, Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia 
Universidad CatólicaSantiago, Chile.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) are the leading cause of world-wide 
nosocomial acquired diarrhea. The current main clinical challenge in CDI is the 
elevated rate of infection recurrence that may reach up to 30% of the patients, 
which has been associated to the formation of dormant spores during the 
infection. We sought to characterize the effects of oral administration of 
specific anti-spore IgY in mouse models of CDI and recurrent CDI. The 
specificity of anti-spore IgY was evaluated in vitro. In both, initiation mouse 
model and recurrence mouse model, we evaluated the prophylactic and therapeutic 
effect of anti-spore IgY, respectively. Our results demonstrate that anti-spore 
IgY exhibited high specificity and titers against C. difficile spores and 
reduced spore adherence to intestinal cells in vitro. Administration of 
anti-spore IgY to C57BL/6 mice prior and during CDI delayed the appearance of 
the diarrhea by 1.5 day, and spore adherence to the colonic mucosa by 90%. 
Notably, in the recurrence model, co-administration of anti-spore IgY coupled 
with vancomycin delayed the appearance of recurrent diarrhea by a median of 2 
days. Collectively, these observations suggest that anti-spore IgY antibodies 
may be used as a novel prophylactic treatment for CDI, or in combination with 
antibiotics to treat CDI and prevent recurrence of the infection.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2017.00365
PMCID: PMC5557795
PMID: 28856119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Infect Immun. 2016 Nov 18;84(12):3434-3444. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00735-16. Print 
2016 Dec.

The Phosphotransfer Protein CD1492 Represses Sporulation Initiation in 
Clostridium difficile.

Childress KO(1), Edwards AN(1), Nawrocki KL(1), Anderson SE(1), Woods EC(1), 
McBride SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Antibiotic Resistance 
Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Antibiotic Resistance 
Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 
shonna.mcbride@emory.edu.

The formation of spores is critical for the survival of Clostridium difficile 
outside the host gastrointestinal tract. Persistence of C. difficile spores 
greatly contributes to the spread of C. difficile infection (CDI), and the 
resistance of spores to antimicrobials facilitates the relapse of infection. 
Despite the importance of sporulation to C. difficile pathogenesis, the 
molecular mechanisms controlling spore formation are not well understood. The 
initiation of sporulation is known to be regulated through activation of the 
conserved transcription factor Spo0A. Multiple regulators influence Spo0A 
activation in other species; however, many of these factors are not conserved in 
C. difficile and few novel factors have been identified. Here, we investigated 
the function of a protein, CD1492, that is annotated as a kinase and was 
originally proposed to promote sporulation by directly phosphorylating Spo0A. We 
found that deletion of CD1492 resulted in increased sporulation, indicating that 
CD1492 is a negative regulator of sporulation. Accordingly, we observed 
increased transcription of Spo0A-dependent genes in the CD1492 mutant. Deletion 
of CD1492 also resulted in decreased toxin production in vitro and in decreased 
virulence in the hamster model of CDI. Further, the CD1492 mutant demonstrated 
effects on gene expression that are not associated with Spo0A activation, 
including lower sigD and rstA transcription, suggesting that this protein 
interacts with factors other than Spo0A. Altogether, the data indicate that 
CD1492 negatively affects sporulation and positively influences motility and 
virulence. These results provide further evidence that C. difficile sporulation 
is regulated differently from that of other endospore-forming species.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00735-16
PMCID: PMC5116721
PMID: 27647869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Vet Microbiol. 2011 Apr 21;149(1-2):186-92. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2010.10.013. 
Epub 2010 Nov 4.

Acquisition of Clostridium difficile by piglets.

Hopman NE(1), Keessen EC, Harmanus C, Sanders IM, van Leengoed LA, Kuijper EJ, 
Lipman LJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Risk Assessment Sciences, Division of Veterinary Public Health, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 2, 3584 CN, The 
Netherlands.

Clostridium difficile is recognized as an important cause of nosocomial 
diarrhoea in humans especially in association with administration of 
antibiotics. In pigs, C. difficile can cause neonatal enteritis and can be 
isolated from faeces from both diseased and healthy animals. The presented 
prospective study describes how soon C. difficile can be isolated from newborn 
piglets after normal parturition and how C. difficile spreads within a pig farm. 
Six sows, their farrowing crates and their litters at one farm were sampled 
until C. difficile was found in all piglets. Within 48 h after birth, all 71 
piglets became positive for C. difficile (two piglets were already positive 
within 1h post partum), all sows became positive within 113 h after parturition 
and the farrowing crates were found intermittently positive. C. difficile could 
also be detected in air samples and in samples of teats of the sows. All 
isolates belonged to PCR ribotype 078. Twenty-one C. difficile ribotype 078 
isolates, found at the farm, were further analyzed by MLVA (multiple-locus 
variable-number tandem repeat analysis) and belonged to one clonal complex, 
except one isolate. To be sure that piglets were not born already infected with 
C. difficile ribotype 078, 38 caesarean derived piglets were sampled immediately 
after surgery. All piglets tested negative at delivery and stayed negative for 
C. difficile ribotype 078 during the 21 days in which they were kept in sterile 
incubators. This study shows that C. difficile ribotype 078 spreads easily 
between sows, piglets and the environment. Vertical transmission of C. difficile 
ribotype 078 was not found and is very unlikely to occur.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2010.10.013
PMID: 21111541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Aug;30(8):1275-80. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12957.

Bacillus amyloliquefaciens as prophylactic treatment for Clostridium 
difficile-associated disease in a mouse model.

Geeraerts S(1), Ducatelle R(1), Haesebrouck F(1), Van Immerseel F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Bacteriology and Avian Diseases, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Probiotics might offer an attractive alternative for 
standard antibiotic therapy to treat Clostridium difficile infections (CDI). We 
specifically selected a Bacillus amyloliquefaciens strain for its high in vitro 
antibacterial activity against C. difficile and tested its efficacy to prevent 
CDI in a mouse model.
METHODS: B. amyloliquefaciens supernatant was tested against a large collection 
of C. difficile strains using an agar well diffusion test. B. amyloliquefaciens 
was orally administered to C57BL/6 mice in which CDI was induced using C. 
difficile VPI 10463, and its effect was compared with control mice receiving no 
treatment and mice receiving Saccharomyces boulardii. Mice were followed up 
daily for signs of disease including weight loss. At necropsy, the colon was 
collected and subjected to histopathological analysis. C. difficile toxin A/B 
levels and colon weight/length and colon/body weight ratios were calculated.
RESULTS: B. amyloliquefaciens supernatant was able to inhibit the growth of all 
C. difficile strains. Results of the in vivo trial indicated a significant 
weight loss for untreated and S. boulardii-treated mice as compared to B. 
amyloliquefaciens-treated mice. C. difficile toxin A and B levels were 
significantly higher for untreated and S. boulardii-treated mice than B. 
amyloliquefaciens-treated mice. A significantly lower degree of colon damage was 
detected for B. amyloliquefaciens-treated mice as compared to untreated and S. 
boulardii-treated mice, based on histopathological analysis, colon weight/length 
and colon/body weight ratios.
CONCLUSION: Administration of B. amyloliquefaciens was successful in preventing 
CDI in a mouse model.

© 2015 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley 
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.12957
PMID: 25800047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Clin Infect Dis. 1995 Jun;20 Suppl 2:S242-50. doi: 
10.1093/clinids/20.supplement_2.s242.

Clostridial disease of the gut.

Borriello SP(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infections and Immunity, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham, 
United Kingdom.

Clostridia are an important cause of morbidity and mortality in humans and 
animals. Some of the most common clostridial infections are those of the gut. 
The primary infections in humans are Clostridium perfringens food poisoning and 
Clostridium difficile-mediated antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis. Less 
common but important infections include non-food poisoning C. perfringens 
nosocomial diarrhea and C. perfringens type C necrotizing jejunitis (pig-bel). 
C. perfringens is also the dominant cause of gastrointestinal infections in 
animals, although Clostridium septicum causing braxy in sheep, Clostridium 
colinum causing ulcerative enteritis is avian species, and Clostridium 
spiroforme causing enterotoxemia in rabbits are important exceptions.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/20.supplement_2.s242
PMID: 7548565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Infect Dis. 2012 Sep 1;206(5):706-13. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jis416. Epub 2012 
Jun 25.

Protection against Clostridium difficile infection with broadly neutralizing 
antitoxin monoclonal antibodies.

Marozsan AJ(1), Ma D, Nagashima KA, Kennedy BJ, Kang YK, Arrigale RR, Donovan 
GP, Magargal WW, Maddon PJ, Olson WC.

Author information:
(1)Progenics Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Tarrytown, New York, USA. ajmphd@yahoo.com

The spore-forming bacterium Clostridium difficile represents the principal cause 
of hospital-acquired diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis worldwide. C. 
difficile infection (CDI) is mediated by 2 bacterial toxins, A and B; 
neutralizing these toxins with monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) provides a potential 
nonantibiotic strategy for combating the rising prevalence, severity, and 
recurrence of CDI. Novel antitoxin mAbs were generated in mice and were 
humanized. The humanized antitoxin A mAb PA-50 and antitoxin B mAb PA-41 have 
picomolar potencies in vitro and bind to novel regions of the respective toxins. 
In a hamster model for CDI, 95% of animals treated with a combination of 
humanized PA-50 and PA-41 showed long-term survival relative to 0% survival of 
animals treated with standard antibiotics or comparator mAbs. These humanized 
mAbs provide insight into C. difficile intoxication and hold promise as 
potential nonantibiotic agents for improving clinical management of CDI.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jis416
PMCID: PMC3491748
PMID: 22732923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Front Microbiol. 2018 Nov 22;9:2849. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02849. eCollection 
2018.

Inhibitory Effect of Ursodeoxycholic Acid on Clostridium difficile Germination 
Is Insufficient to Prevent Colitis: A Study in Hamsters and Humans.

Palmieri LJ(1)(2)(3), Rainteau D(1), Sokol H(1)(4), Beaugerie L(1)(4), Dior 
M(5), Coffin B(3)(5), Humbert L(1), Eguether T(1), Bado A(3), Hoys S(2), Janoir 
C(2), Duboc H(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)ERL INSERM U1157/UMR7203, PM2, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), 
Faculté de Médecine Saint-Antoine, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(2)EA4043 Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Université Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(3)INSERM U1149, Centre de Recherche sur l'Inflammation, Faculté de Médecine 
Paris Diderot, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Saint Antoine Hospital, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Louis Mourier Hospital, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.

Introduction: Bile acids (BA) influence germination and growth of Clostridium 
difficile. Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a BA minor in human, used for 
cholestatic liver diseases, inhibits germination and growth of C. difficile in 
vitro, but was never tested in vivo with an infectious challenge versus control. 
We hypothesized that UDCA could prevent CDI. We evaluated the effects of UDCA on 
C. difficile in vitro and in hamsters, with pharmacokinetics study and with an 
infectious challenge. Then, we studied CDI incidence in UDCA-treated patients. 
Methods: We evaluated germination and growth of C. difficile, with 0.01, 0.05, 
and 0.1% UDCA. We analyzed fecal BA of hamsters receiving antibiotics and UDCA 
(50 mg/kg/day), antibiotics, or UDCA alone. Then, we challenged with spores of 
C. difficile at D6 hamsters treated with UDCA (50 mg/kg/day) from D1 to D13, 
versus control. In human, we analyzed the database of a cohort on CDI in acute 
flares of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). As PSC-IBD patients were under UDCA 
treatment, we compared PSC-IBD patients to IBD patients without PSC. Results: In 
vitro, UDCA inhibited germination and growth of C. difficile at 0.05 and 0.1%, 
competing with 0.1% TCA (with 0.1%: 0.05% ± 0.05% colony forming unit versus 
100% ± 0%, P < 0.0001). In hamsters, UDCA reached high levels only when 
administered with antibiotics (43.5% UDCA at D5). Without antibiotics, UDCA was 
in small amount in feces (max. 4.28%), probably because of UDCA transformation 
into LCA by gut microbiota. During infectious challenge, mortality was similar 
in animals treated or not with UDCA (62.5%, n = 5/8, P = 0.78). UDCA percentage 
was high, similar and with the same kinetics in dead and surviving hamsters. 
However, dead hamsters had a higher ratio of primary over secondary BA compared 
to surviving hamsters. 9% (n = 41/404) of IBD patients without PSC had a CDI, 
versus 25% (n = 4/12) of PSC-IBD patients treated with UDCA. Conclusion: We 
confirmed the inhibitory effect of UDCA on growth and germination of C. 
difficile in vitro, with 0.05 or 0.1% UDCA. However, in our hamster model, UDCA 
was inefficient to prevent CDI, despite high levels of UDCA in feces. Patients 
with PSC-IBD treated with UDCA did not have less CDI than IBD patients.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02849
PMCID: PMC6262072
PMID: 30524414


166. Braz J Microbiol. 2013 Mar 26;44(1):133-7. doi: 10.1590/S1517-83822013005000008. 
eCollection 2013.

Detection of toxins A/B and isolation of Clostridium difficile and Clostridium 
perfringens from dogs in Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Silva RO(1), Santos RL, Pires PS, Pereira LC, Pereira ST, Duarte MC, de Assis 
RA, Lobato FC.

Author information:
(1)Escola de Veterinária, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 
MG, Brazil.

The objective of this study was to detect C. difficile A/B toxins and to isolate 
strains of C. perfringens and C. difficile from diarrheic and non-diarrheic dogs 
in Brazil. Stool samples were collected from 57 dogs, 35 of which were 
apparently healthy, and 22 of which were diarrheic. C. difficile A/B toxins were 
detected by ELISA, and C. perfringens and C. difficile were identified by 
multiplex PCR. C. difficile A/B toxins were detected in 21 samples (36.8%). Of 
these, 16 (76.2%) were from diarrheic dogs, and five (23.8%) were from 
non-diarrheic dogs. Twelve C. difficile strains (21.1%) were isolated, of which 
ten were A(+)B(+) and two were A(-)B(-). All non-toxigenic strains were isolated 
from non-diarrheic animals. The binary toxin gene cdtB was found in one strain, 
which was A(+)B(+) and was derived from a non-diarrheic dog. C. perfringens 
strains were isolated from 40 samples (70.2%). Of these, 18 (45%) were from the 
diarrheic group, and 22 (55%) belonged to the non-diarrheic group. All isolates 
were classified as C. perfringens type A and there was an association between 
the detection of the cpe gene and the presence of diarrhea. Interestingly, ten 
strains (25%) were positive for the presence of the cpb2 gene. The high rate of 
detection of the A/B toxins in non-diarrheic dogs suggests the occurrence of 
subclinical disease in dogs or carriage of its toxins without disease. More 
studies are needed to elucidate the epidemiology of C. difficile and C. 
perfringens in dogs and to better our understanding of C. difficile as a 
zoonotic agent. This is the first study to report the binary toxin gene in C. 
difficile strains isolated from dogs in Brazil.

DOI: 10.1590/S1517-83822013005000008
PMCID: PMC3804189
PMID: 24159295


167. Clin Exp Gastroenterol. 2019 Dec 10;12:449-456. doi: 10.2147/CEG.S223886. 
eCollection 2019.

Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs Impact on the Outcomes of Hospitalized 
Patients with Clostridium difficile Infection.

Patel H(1)(2), Makker J(1)(2), Vakde T(1)(3), Shaikh D(1)(2), Badipatla K(1)(2), 
Dunne J(4), Mantri N(1), Nayudu SK(1)(2), Glandt M(1), Balar B(1)(2), Chilimuri 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Bronx Care Health System, Affiliated with Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Bronx, NY, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Bronx Care Health System, Affiliated with Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Bronx, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Bronx Care Health System, 
Affiliated with Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Support Service and Operation, Bronx Care Health System, Affiliated with 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Bronx, NY, USA.

PURPOSE: Mouse model experiments have demonstrated an increased Clostridium 
difficile infection (CDI) severity with Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 
(NSAIDs) use. We aim to evaluate the impact of NSAIDs in humans after a 
diagnosis of CDI on primary outcomes defined as I) all-cause mortality and II) 
toxic mega-colon attributable to CDI.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All hospitalized patients with a diagnosis of CDI were 
divided into two groups; those with NSAIDs administered up to 10 days after 
onset of CDI versus no NSAIDs use. The primary outcomes were analyzed between 
the groups, while controlling for severity of CDI. A logistic regression 
analysis was performed to identify the predictors of worse outcomes.
RESULTS: NSAIDs were administered in 14% (n=80) of the 568 hospitalized visits 
for an average of 2.5 days after the CDI diagnosis. All-cause mortality was high 
in patients who did not receive NSAIDs as compared to those who did receive 
NSAIDs (16.6% vs 12.5%, p 0.354). Patients who were prescribed NSAIDs were more 
likely to have toxic mega-colon as compared to those who were not prescribed 
NSAIDs (2.5% vs 0.6%, p 0.094). Results were not statistically significant, even 
after controlling for CDI severity. Logistic regression analysis did not 
identify NSAIDs administration as a significant factor for all-cause mortality 
in CDI patients.
CONCLUSION: This retrospective study results, contrary to mouse model, did not 
show association between NSAID use and CDI related mortality and toxic 
mega-colon. Shorter duration of NSAIDs use, younger people in study group, and 
timely CDI treatment may have resulted in contrasting results.

© 2019 Patel et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CEG.S223886
PMCID: PMC6911331
PMID: 31849510

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.


168. Vet Microbiol. 2003 Jun 24;94(1):39-45. doi: 10.1016/s0378-1135(03)00061-0.

Antimicrobial susceptibilities of canine Clostridium difficile and Clostridium 
perfringens isolates to commonly utilized antimicrobial drugs.

Marks SL(1), Kather EJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California, 2108 Tupper Hall, Davis, CA 95616, USA. 
slmarks@ucdavis.edu

Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens are anaerobic, Gram-positive 
bacilli that are common causes of enteritis and enterotoxemias in both domestic 
animals and humans. Both organisms have been associated with acute and chronic 
large and small bowel diarrhea, and acute hemorrhagic diarrheal syndrome in the 
dog. The objective of this study was to determine the in vitro antimicrobial 
susceptibilities of canine C. difficile and C. perfringens isolates in an effort 
to optimize antimicrobial therapy for dogs with clostridial-associated diarrhea. 
The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of antibiotics recommended for 
treating C. difficile (metronidazole, vancomycin) and C. perfringens-associated 
diarrhea in the dog (ampicillin, erythromycin, metronidazole, tetracycline, 
tylosin) were determined for 70 canine fecal C. difficile isolates and 131 C. 
perfringens isolates. All C. difficile isolates tested had an MIC of <or=1 for 
both metronidazole and vancomycin. Ninety-five percent (124/131) of C. 
perfringens isolates tested had an MIC for ampicillin of <or=0.125 microg/ml. 
Two C. perfringens isolates had an MIC of >or=256 microg/ml for both 
erythromycin and tylosin. A third C. perfringens isolate had an MIC of 32 
microg/ml for metronidazole. Based on the results of this study, ampicillin, 
erythromycin, metronidazole, and tylosin appear to be effective antibiotics for 
the treatment of C. perfringens-associated diarrhea, although resistant strains 
do exist. However, because there is limited information regarding breakpoints 
for veterinary anaerobes, and because intestinal concentrations are not known, 
in vitro results should be interpreted with caution.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-1135(03)00061-0
PMID: 12742714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Gut. 2000 Apr;46(4):481-6. doi: 10.1136/gut.46.4.481.

Clostridium difficile toxin A excites enteric neurones and suppresses 
sympathetic neurotransmission in the guinea pig.

Xia Y(1), Hu HZ, Liu S, Pothoulakis C, Wood JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, The Ohio State University, College of Medicine and 
Public Health, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Evidence suggests that the intestinal actions of 
Clostridium difficile toxin A-stimulation of secretion and motility, and an 
acute inflammatory response-have a neurally mediated component.
METHODS: Direct intracellular electrophysiological recording of electrical and 
synaptic behaviour in enteric neurones was performed in the submucous plexus of 
guinea pig small intestine during exposure to the toxin.
RESULTS: Application of toxin A affected both the electrical behaviour of the 
neuronal cell bodies and inhibitory noradrenergic neurotransmission to the cell 
bodies. Altered electrical behaviour included depolarisation and increased 
excitability. Tetrodotoxin or a histamine H(2) receptor antagonist did not 
affect the depolarisation evoked by toxin A. Failure of the histamine antagonist 
to suppress the actions of toxin A is evidence that its actions were not 
mediated by degranulation of intramural mast cells. The action of toxin A on 
neurotransmission was suppression of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials evoked 
in the neuronal cell bodies by stimulation of sympathetic nerve fibres that 
synapsed with the cell bodies. The inhibitory postsynaptic potentials were 
mediated by norepinephrine (noradrenaline) acting at postsynaptic alpha 
adrenoceptors on the cell bodies. Hyperpolarising responses evoked in the cell 
bodies by micropressure application of norepinephrine were unaffected by toxin 
A. This fulfils criteria for a presynaptic inhibitory action of toxin A to 
suppress release of norepinephrine from sympathetic postganglionic axons.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that the neural component of the action of toxin A 
involves both direct excitation of enteric neurones and suppression of 
norepinephrine release from postganglionic sympathetic nerve fibres in the 
enteric nervous system.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.46.4.481
PMCID: PMC1727875
PMID: 10716676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Vet Med Sci. 2013 May 2;75(4):539-41. doi: 10.1292/jvms.12-0353. Epub 2012 Nov 
22.

Clostridium difficile isolated from the fecal contents of swine in Japan.

Asai T(1), Usui M, Hiki M, Kawanishi M, Nagai H, Sasaki Y.

Author information:
(1)National Veterinary Assay Laboratory, Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and 
Fisheries, 1-15-1 Tokura, Kokubunji, Tokyo, Japan. asai-t@nval.maff.go.jp

A total of 250 fecal content samples were collected from 25 farrow-to-finish pig 
farms and examined for the prevalence of Clostridium difficile by using ethanol 
treatment followed by plating onto selective 
media--cycloserine-cefoxitin-mannitol agar--for the isolation of Clostridium 
difficile. Two specimens (0.8%, 95% confidential interval: 0-2.9%) were positive 
for C. difficile. One isolate was only positive for toxin B, and the other 
isolate was negative for both toxins A and B. Thus, prevalence of Clostridium 
difficile was found to be low among finishing pigs in Japan.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.12-0353
PMID: 23171688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. BMC Infect Dis. 2016 Oct 22;16(1):596. doi: 10.1186/s12879-016-1924-1.

A DNA vaccine targeting TcdA and TcdB induces protective immunity against 
Clostridium difficile.

Zhang BZ(1)(2)(3), Cai J(2), Yu B(1), Hua Y(1), Lau CC(2), Kao RY(2), Sze KH(2), 
Yuen KY(4), Huang JD(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Li Ka Shing 
Faculty of Medicine, 3/F, Laboratory Block, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong 
Kong, China.
(2)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, University Pathology 
Building, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.
(3)HKU-Shenzhen Institute of Research and Innovation, The University of Hong 
Kong, Shenzhen, China.
(4)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, University Pathology 
Building, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China. kyyuen@hkucc.hku.hk.
(5)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Li Ka Shing 
Faculty of Medicine, 3/F, Laboratory Block, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong 
Kong, China. jdhuang@hku.hk.
(6)HKU-Shenzhen Institute of Research and Innovation, The University of Hong 
Kong, Shenzhen, China. jdhuang@hku.hk.
(7)The Centre for Synthetic Biology Engineering Research, Shenzhen Institutes of 
Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Science, Shenzhen, China. 
jdhuang@hku.hk.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile-associated disease (CDAD) constitutes a great 
majority of hospital diarrhea cases in industrialized countries and is induced 
by two types of large toxin molecules: toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB). 
Development of immunotherapeutic approaches, either active or passive, has seen 
a resurgence in recent years. Studies have described vaccine plasmids that 
express either TcdA and/or TcdB receptor binding domain (RBD). However, the 
effectiveness of one vector encoding both toxin RBDs against CDAD has not been 
evaluated.
METHODS: In the study, we constructed highly optimized plasmids to express the 
receptor binding domains of both TcdA and TcdB from a single vector. The DNA 
vaccine was evaluated in two animal models for its immunogenicity and protective 
effects.
RESULTS: The DNA vaccine induced high levels of serum antibodies to toxin A 
and/or B and demonstrated neutralizing activity in both in vitro and in vivo 
systems. In a C. difficile hamster infection model, immunization with the DNA 
vaccine reduced infection severity and conferred significant protection against 
a lethal C. difficile strain.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has demonstrated a single plasmid encoding the RBD 
domains of C. difficile TcdA and TcdB as a DNA vaccine that could provide 
protection from C. difficile disease.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-016-1924-1
PMCID: PMC5075199
PMID: 27770789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Carbohydr Res. 2008 Mar 17;343(4):703-10. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2008.01.002. 
Epub 2008 Jan 12.

Clostridium difficile cell-surface polysaccharides composed of pentaglycosyl and 
hexaglycosyl phosphate repeating units.

Ganeshapillai J(1), Vinogradov E, Rousseau J, Weese JS, Monteiro MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada N1G 2W1.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive bacterium that is known to be a cause 
of enteric diseases in humans. It is the leading cause of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis. Recently, large outbreaks of C. 
difficile-associated diarrhea have been reported internationally, and there have 
been reports of increases in severe disease, mortality and relapse rates. At the 
moment, there is no vaccine against C. difficile, and the medical prevention of 
C. difficile infection is mostly based on the prophylactic use of antibiotics; 
however, this has led to an increase in the incidence of the disease. Here, we 
describe the chemical structure of C. difficile cell-surface polysaccharides. 
The polysaccharides of three C. difficile strains were structurally analyzed; 
ribotype 027 (North American pulsotype 1) strain was observed to express two 
polysaccharides, one was composed of a branched pentaglycosyl phosphate 
repeating unit: 
[-->4)-alpha-l-Rhap-(1-->3)-beta-D-Glcp-(1-->4)-[alpha-l-Rhap-(1-->3]-alpha-D-Glcp-(1-->2)-alpha-D-Glcp-(1-->P] 
and the other was composed of a hexaglycosyl phosphate repeating unit: 
[-->6)-beta-D-Glcp-(1-->3)-beta-D-GalpNAc-(1-->4)-alpha-D-Glcp-(1-->4)-[beta-D-Glcp-(1-->]-beta-D-GalpNAc-(1-->3)-alpha-D-Manp-(1-->P]. 
The latter polysaccharide was also observed to be produced by strains MOH900 and 
MOH718. The results described here represent the first literature report 
describing the covalent chemical structures of C. difficile cell-surface 
polysaccharides, of which PS-II appears to be a regular C. difficile antigen. 
These C. difficile teichoic-acid-like polysaccharides will be tested as 
immunogens in vaccine preparations in a rat and horse model.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carres.2008.01.002
PMID: 18237724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Infect Immun. 2014 Jun;82(6):2345-55. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01483-13. Epub 2014 Mar 
24.

Clostridium difficile extracytoplasmic function σ factor σV regulates lysozyme 
resistance and is necessary for pathogenesis in the hamster model of infection.

Ho TD(1), Williams KB, Chen Y, Helm RF, Popham DL, Ellermeier CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Clostridium difficile is a clinically important pathogen and the most common 
cause of hospital-acquired infectious diarrhea. Expression of the C. difficile 
gene csfV, which encodes σ(V), an extracytoplasmic function σ factor, is induced 
by lysozyme, which damages the peptidoglycan of bacteria. Here we show that σ(V) 
is required for lysozyme resistance in C. difficile. Using microarray analysis, 
we identified the C. difficile genes whose expression is dependent upon σ(V) and 
is induced by lysozyme. Although the peptidoglycan of wild-type C. difficile is 
intrinsically highly deacetylated, we have found that exposure to lysozyme leads 
to additional peptidoglycan deacetylation. This lysozyme-induced deacetylation 
is dependent upon σ(V). Expression of pdaV, which encodes a putative 
peptidoglycan deacetylase, was able to increase lysozyme resistance of a csfV 
mutant. The csfV mutant strain is severely attenuated compared to wild-type C. 
difficile in a hamster model of C. difficile-associated disease. We conclude 
that the σ(V) signal transduction system, which senses the host innate immune 
defense enzyme lysozyme, is required for lysozyme resistance and is necessary 
during C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01483-13
PMCID: PMC4019185
PMID: 24664503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Equine Vet J. 2013 Nov;45(6):671-5. doi: 10.1111/evj.12046. Epub 2013 Mar 3.

Detection of A/B toxin and isolation of Clostridium difficile and Clostridium 
perfringens from foals.

Silva RO(1), Ribeiro MG, Palhares MS, Borges AS, Maranhão RP, Silva MX, Lucas 
TM, Olivo G, Lobato FC.

Author information:
(1)Veterinary School, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (UFMG), Brazil.

REASONS FOR PERFORMING THE STUDY: Toxin detection and screening could contribute 
to knowledge of the transmission patterns, risk factors and epidemiology of 
Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens.
OBJECTIVE: To isolate C. difficile and C. perfringens and to detect A/B toxins 
in faecal samples from diarrhoeic and nondiarrhoeic foals.
STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional observational study.
METHODS: A total of 153 samples from foals were collected: 139 samples from 
farms and 14 samples from diarrhoeic foals admitted to a veterinary hospital. 
The A/B toxins were detected by cytotoxicity assay. All suspected colonies of C. 
perfringens were subjected to polymerase chain reaction for detection of the 
major toxin genes (α, β, ε and ι) and for detection of β2-, NetB- and 
enterotoxin-encoding genes. Furthermore, C. difficile and C. perfringens 
isolates were evaluated for in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility.
RESULTS: Seven of 153 (4.6%) samples, all from diarrhoeic foals, were positive 
for C. difficile A/B toxin. Of these, 5 of 14 (35.7%) were from hospitalised 
foals, and only 2 of 63 (3.2%) diarrhoeic foal samples were from farms (P = 
0.002). Clostridium perfringens was isolated from 31 (20.3%) foals, of which 21 
of 76 (27.6%) were diarrhoeic and 10 of 76 (13.2%) were nondiarrhoeic, 
demonstrating a difference between these 2 groups (P = 0.045). Only 4 strains 
were positive for the β2-encoding gene (cpb2). All C. difficile and C. 
perfringens isolates were susceptible to metronidazole and vancomycin.
CONCLUSIONS: The present report highlights the need for laboratory diagnostics 
to differentiate C. difficile-associated infection in foals from other causes of 
diarrhoea to facilitate adequate antimicrobial therapy.
POTENTIAL RELEVANCE: More studies are needed to clarify the role of C. 
perfringens as a primary agent of diarrhoea in foals.

© 2013 EVJ Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/evj.12046
PMID: 23452044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;646:215-27. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-365-7_14.

Refinement of the hamster model of Clostridium difficile disease.

Douce G(1), Goulding D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, IBLS, Glasgow Biomedical Research Centre, 
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.

The Golden Syrian hamster is widely regarded as the most relevant small animal 
model of Clostridium difficile disease as oral infection of animals pre-treated 
with antibiotics reproduces many of the symptoms observed in man. These include 
diarrhoea, histological damage, colonisation of the large bowel and sporulation 
of the organism at the terminal stage of the disease. However, infection results 
in a fatal outcome, which in the past has been used as an experimental endpoint. 
More recently, attempts have been made to refine the model to maximise the 
scientific data generated whilst minimising animal suffering. This has been 
achieved using a combination of qualitative and quantitative measurements taken 
during the course of the infection and at post-mortem. This has allowed timing 
of experiments to be optimised to ensure appropriate monitoring of animals 
during the acute phase of infection and provides opportunities to establish 
appropriate humane endpoints to these experiments.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60327-365-7_14
PMID: 20597012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Comp Immunol Microbiol Infect Dis. 2007 May;30(3):163-74. doi: 
10.1016/j.cimid.2006.11.006. Epub 2007 Jan 19.

Toxin production by and adhesive properties of Clostridium difficile isolated 
from humans and horses with antibiotic-associated diarrhea.

Taha S(1), Johansson O, Rivera Jonsson S, Heimer D, Krovacek K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Veterinary Public Health, Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine and Animal Science, SLU, Box 7036, 750 07 Uppsala, Sweden.

Clostridium difficile is a common nosocomial pathogen in humans and animals that 
causes diarrhea and colitis following antibiotic therapy. Isolates of C. 
difficile obtained from faecal material from 20 human patients and 6 equine 
subjects with antibiotic-associated diarrhea were investigated regarding 
production of toxins A and B, their capacity to adhere to the human intestinal 
Caco-2 cell line and equine intestinal cells, and for the presence of fimbriae. 
The results showed that most (17/20) of the human clinical isolates produced 
both toxins A and B. One of the human isolates proved toxin A-negative/toxin 
B-positive. All (6/6) horse isolates were positive for both toxins A and B. Both 
the human and horse isolates possessed the capacity to adhere, to varying 
degree, to human and equine intestinal cells. It appeared that human isolates 
produced greater amounts of toxin B, and that there was a host-species 
dependency on ability to attach to intestinal epithelial cells. No fimbriae were 
found in any of the investigated isolates.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cimid.2006.11.006
PMID: 17239950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Infect Immun. 2013 Jun;81(6):2190-6. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01074-12. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Toll-like receptor 5-dependent immunogenicity and protective efficacy of a 
recombinant fusion protein vaccine containing the nontoxic domains of 
Clostridium difficile toxins A and B and Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium 
flagellin in a mouse model of Clostridium difficile disease.

Ghose C(1), Verhagen JM, Chen X, Yu J, Huang Y, Chenesseau O, Kelly CP, Ho DD.

Author information:
(1)Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center, New York, New York, USA.

Clostridium difficile is a spore-forming bacillus that produces toxin-mediated 
enteric disease. C. difficile expresses two major virulence factors, toxin A 
(TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB). Human and animal studies demonstrate a clear 
association between humoral immunity to these toxins and protection against C. 
difficile infection (CDI). The receptor binding-domains (RBDs) of TcdA and TcdB 
are known to be immunogenic. Here, we tested the immunoadjuvant properties of 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium flagellin (FliC) subunit D1 as an innate 
immune agonist expressed as a recombinant fusion vaccine targeting the RBDs of 
TcdA and TcdB in mice. Intraperitoneally immunized mice developed prominent 
anti-TcdA and anti-TcdB immunoglobulin G in serum. The protective efficacy of 
the recombinant vaccines, with or without an adjuvant, was tested in a mouse 
model of CDI that closely represents the human disease. Following 
intraperitoneal immunization equivalent to two doses of toxoid A and toxoid B 
vaccine adjuvanted with alum and oral challenge with C. difficile VPI 10463, 
C57BL/6 mice were able to mount a protective immune response that prevented 
diarrhea and death compared to mice immunzed with alum alone. These results are 
significantly different from those for control mice (P < 0.001). These results 
provide evidence that a recombinant protein-based vaccine targeting the RBDs of 
the C. difficile toxins adjuvanted with S. Typhimurium flagellin can induce 
rapid, high-level protection in a mouse model of CDI when challenged with the 
homologous strain from which the vaccine antigens were derived and warrant 
further preclinical testing against clinically relevant C. difficile strains in 
the mouse and hamster models of CDI.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01074-12
PMCID: PMC3676027
PMID: 23545305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Exot Pet Med. 2013 Apr;22(2):118-131. doi: 10.1053/j.jepm.2013.05.004. Epub 
2013 Sep 5.

Gastrointestinal Disease in Exotic Small Mammals.

Huynh M(1), Pignon C(2).

Author information:
(1)Exotic Medicine Service, Centre Hospitalier Vétérinaire Fregis, Arcueil, 
France.
(2)Exotic Medicine Service, Centre Hospitalier Vétérinaire d'Alfort, Ecole 
Nationale Vétérinaire d'Alfort, Maisons-Alfort, France.

Exotic small mammal medicine is a relatively new specialty area within 
veterinary medicine. Ferrets, rabbits, and rodents have long been used as animal 
models in human medical research investigations, resulting in a body of basic 
anatomic and physiologic information that can be used by veterinarians treating 
these species. Unfortunately, there is a paucity of veterinary articles that 
describe clinical presentation, diagnosis, and treatment options of 
gastrointestinal (GI) disease as it affects exotic small mammals. Although there 
is little reference material relating to exotic small mammal GI disease, 
patients are commonly presented to veterinary hospitals with digestive tract 
disorders. This article provides the latest information available for GI disease 
in ferrets (Helicobacter mustelae gastritis, inflammatory bowel disease [IBD], 
GI lymphoma, systemic coronavirus, coccidiosis, and liver disease), rabbits (GI 
motility disorders, liver lobe torsion, astrovirus, and coccidiosis), guinea 
pigs (gastric dilatation volvulus [GDV]), rats (Taenia taeniaeformis), and 
hamsters (Clostridium difficile). Both noninfectious diseases and emerging 
infectious diseases are reviewed as well as the most up-to-date diagnostics and 
treatment options.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jepm.2013.05.004
PMCID: PMC7106034
PMID: 32288678


179. Infect Immun. 2016 Sep 19;84(10):2871-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00583-16. Print 2016 
Oct.

Clostridium difficile Toxins TcdA and TcdB Cause Colonic Tissue Damage by 
Distinct Mechanisms.

Chumbler NM(1), Farrow MA(1), Lapierre LA(2), Franklin JL(3), Lacy DB(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA The Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA Epithelial Biology Center, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee, USA The Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare 
System, Nashville, Tennessee, USA Epithelial Biology Center, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA The Veterans Affairs Tennessee 
Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee, USA borden.lacy@vanderbilt.edu.

As the major cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea, Clostridium difficile is a 
serious problem in health care facilities worldwide. C. difficile produces two 
large toxins, TcdA and TcdB, which are the primary virulence factors in disease. 
The respective functions of these toxins have been difficult to discern, in part 
because the cytotoxicity profiles for these toxins differ with concentration and 
cell type. The goal of this study was to develop a cell culture model that would 
allow a side-by-side mechanistic comparison of the toxins. Conditionally 
immortalized, young adult mouse colonic (YAMC) epithelial cells demonstrate an 
exquisite sensitivity to both toxins with phenotypes that agree with 
observations in tissue explants. TcdA intoxication results in an apoptotic cell 
death that is dependent on the glucosyltransferase activity of the toxin. In 
contrast, TcdB has a bimodal mechanism; it induces apoptosis in a 
glucosyltransferase-dependent manner at lower concentrations and 
glucosyltransferase-independent necrotic death at higher concentrations. The 
direct comparison of the responses to TcdA and TcdB in cells and colonic 
explants provides the opportunity to unify a large body of observations made by 
many independent investigators.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00583-16
PMCID: PMC5038081
PMID: 27456833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2018;152(1):39-50. doi: 10.1254/fpj.152.39.

[Preclinical and clinical properties of Bezlotoxumab (ZINPLAVA(®) 25 mg/mL 
concentrate for solution for infusion), novel therapeutic agent for Clostridium 
difficile infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Kinoshita K(1).

Author information:
(1)Regulatory Affairs Area, Japan Development, MSD K.K.

Clostridium difficile (C. difficile), an enterobacteria, flourishes and produces 
potent toxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), after the disruption of the 
normal colonic microbiota by antibiotic therapy. C. difficile infection (CDI) 
may induce life-threatening complications such as fulminant colitis through 
damage of the intestinal wall by the toxins, therefore the prevention of CDI 
recurrence is the most important in CDI treatment. Bezlotoxumab is a human 
monoclonal antibody that neutralizes the activity of TcdB directly. The antibody 
inhibited cytotoxicity by TcdB derived from various ribotypes of C. difficile at 
a concentration (EC50) of 1/150 or less of the serum concentration (Cmax: 
169 μg/mL) in CDI patients at the clinical dose. Moreover the anti-cytotoxicity 
effects of the antibody were also observed against 81 clinically isolated C. 
difficile strains (incl. 018 [smz] and 369 [trf]: Japanese prevalent ribotypes; 
027: hypervirulent ribotype) obtained in Japan and western countries. The 
antibody prolonged survival time of hamster and rat CDI models in a 
dose-dependent manner. In clinical phase III studies (MODIFY I and II), the 
recurrence rate of CDI up to 12 weeks after administration of the bezlotoxumab 
group was significantly lower (P<0.0001) than the placebo group. Bezlotoxumab is 
the world's first drug with an indication for reduce recurrence of CDI. In 
Japan, bezlotoxumab was approved for marketing in September, and launched in 
December in 2017. Bezlotoxumab is effective for broad ribotypes of C. difficile, 
therefore it expects to contribute to CDI treatment through the reduce 
recurrence of the CDI.

DOI: 10.1254/fpj.152.39
PMID: 29998951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 23;9(10):e110826. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110826. 
eCollection 2014.

Utility of Clostridium difficile toxin B for inducing anti-tumor immunity.

Huang T(1), Li S(1), Li G(2), Tian Y(2), Wang H(2), Shi L(3), Perez-Cordon G(3), 
Mao L(4), Wang X(5), Wang J(2), Feng H(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology 
(SCUT), Guangzhou, China; Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University of 
Maryland Dental School, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology 
(SCUT), Guangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University of Maryland Dental School, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Department of Oncology and Diagnostics, University of Maryland Dental School, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Institute of Life Science, General Hospital of the People's Liberation Army, 
Beijing, China.

Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB) is a key virulence factor of bacterium and 
induces intestinal inflammatory disease. Because of its potent cytotoxic and 
proinflammatory activities, we investigated the utility of TcdB in developing 
anti-tumor immunity. TcdB induced cell death in mouse colorectal cancer CT26 
cells, and the intoxicated cells stimulated the activation of mouse bone 
marrow-derived dendritic cells and subsequent T cell activation in vitro. 
Immunization of BALB/c mice with toxin-treated CT26 cells elicited potent 
anti-tumor immunity that protected mice from a lethal challenge of the same 
tumor cells and rejected pre-injected tumors. The anti-tumor immunity generated 
was cell-mediated, long-term, and tumor-specific. Further experiments 
demonstrated that the intact cell bodies were important for the immunogenicity 
since lysing the toxin-treated tumor cells reduced their ability to induce 
antitumor immunity. Finally, we showed that TcdB is able to induce potent 
anti-tumor immunity in B16-F10 melanoma model. Taken together, these data 
demonstrate the utility of C. difficile toxin B for developing anti-tumor 
immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110826
PMCID: PMC4207755
PMID: 25340750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


182. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 23;11(6):e0157970. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157970. 
eCollection 2016.

Novel Clostridium difficile Anti-Toxin (TcdA and TcdB) Humanized Monoclonal 
Antibodies Demonstrate In Vitro Neutralization across a Broad Spectrum of 
Clinical Strains and In Vivo Potency in a Hamster Spore Challenge Model.

Qiu H(1), Cassan R(1), Johnstone D(1), Han X(1), Joyee AG(1), McQuoid M(1), Masi 
A(1), Merluza J(1), Hrehorak B(1), Reid R(1), Kennedy K(1), Tighe B(1), Rak 
C(1), Leonhardt M(1), Dupas B(1), Saward L(1), Berry JD(1), Nykiforuk CL(1).

Author information:
(1)Cangene Corporation, a subsidiary of Emergent BioSolutions Inc., 155 
Innovation Drive, Winnipeg, MB, R3T 5Y3, Canada.

Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) infection (CDI) is the main cause of 
nosocomial antibiotic-associated colitis and increased incidence of 
community-associated diarrhea in industrialized countries. At present, the 
primary treatment of CDI is antibiotic administration, which is effective but 
often associated with recurrence, especially in the elderly. Pathogenic strains 
produce enterotoxin, toxin A (TcdA), and cytotoxin, toxin B (TcdB), which are 
necessary for C. difficile induced diarrhea and gut pathological changes. 
Administration of anti-toxin antibodies provides an alternative approach to 
treat CDI, and has shown promising results in preclinical and clinical studies. 
In the current study, several humanized anti-TcdA and anti-TcdB monoclonal 
antibodies were generated and their protective potency was characterized in a 
hamster infection model. The humanized anti-TcdA (CANmAbA4) and anti-TcdB 
(CANmAbB4 and CANmAbB1) antibodies showed broad spectrum in vitro neutralization 
of toxins from clinical strains and neutralization in a mouse toxin challenge 
model. Moreover, co-administration of humanized antibodies (CANmAbA4 and 
CANmAbB4 cocktail) provided a high level of protection in a dose dependent 
manner (85% versus 57% survival at day 22 for 50 mg/kg and 20 mg/kg doses, 
respectively) in a hamster gastrointestinal infection (GI) model. This study 
describes the protective effects conferred by novel neutralizing anti-toxin 
monoclonal antibodies against C. difficile toxins and their potential as 
therapeutic agents in treating CDI.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0157970
PMCID: PMC4919053
PMID: 27336843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following competing interests specific to the 
manuscript content: All authors were paid employees of Cangene Corporation dba 
Emergent BioSolutions, authors may own stocks or shares of EBSI. There are two 
published patent applications: PCT/US2012/051948, entitled CLOSTRIDIUM DIFFICILE 
ANTIBODIES, and PCT/US2013/072467, entitled ANTIBODIES AGAINST CLOSTRIDIUM 
DIFFICILE. This does not the authors’ adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.


183. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015;70(6):1757-62. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkv005. Epub 2015 
Feb 3.

SMT19969 for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI): in vivo efficacy compared 
with fidaxomicin and vancomycin in the hamster model of CDI.

Sattar A(1), Thommes P(1), Payne L(1), Warn P(1), Vickers RJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Evotec (UK), Williams House, Manchester Science Park, Lloyd Street North, 
Manchester M15 6SE, UK.
(2)Summit plc, Abingdon, Oxfordshire, UK richard.vickers@summitplc.com.

OBJECTIVES: SMT19969 is a novel narrow-spectrum antimicrobial under development 
for the treatment of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). The objectives were 
to assess the relative efficacies of SMT19969, vancomycin and fidaxomicin in the 
hamster model of CDI.
METHODS: Hamsters were infected with either C. difficile BI1 (ribotype 027) or 
C. difficile 630 (ribotype 012) prior to treatment with vehicle, SMT19969, 
fidaxomicin or vancomycin for 5 days. Animals were further monitored through to 
day 28 and survival recorded. Plasma and gastrointestinal concentrations of 
SMT19969 following single and repeat administration in infected hamsters were 
determined.
RESULTS: Following infection with C. difficile BI1, treatment with SMT19969, 
vancomycin and fidaxomicin resulted in 100% survival during the 5 day dosing 
period, with 90%-100% of animals receiving SMT19969 and fidaxomicin surviving 
during the post-dosing follow-up period. Whilst protective during treatment, 
onset of mortality was observed on day 11 in animals treated with vancomycin, 
with a 10% survival recorded by day 28. Similar results were observed for 
SMT19969 and vancomycin following infection with C. difficile 630, with day 28 
survival rates of 80%-100% and 0%, respectively. Fidaxomicin protected animals 
infected with C. difficile 630 from mortality during dosing, although day 28 
survival rates varied from 0% to 40% depending on dose. Plasma levels of 
SMT19969 were typically below the limit of quantification, but levels in the 
gastrointestinal tract remained far in excess of the MIC.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that SMT19969 is highly effective at treating both 
acute infection and preventing recurrent disease and support continued 
investigation of SMT19969 as a potential therapy for CDI.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkv005
PMCID: PMC4498292
PMID: 25652749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Epidemiol Infect. 1991 Dec;107(3):659-65. doi: 10.1017/s0950268800049359.

Gastrointestinal carriage of Clostridium difficile in cats and dogs attending 
veterinary clinics.

Riley TV(1), Adams JE, O'Neill GL, Bowman RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Western Australia, Nedlands.

Cats and dogs being treated at two veterinary clinics were investigated for 
gastrointestinal carriage of Clostridium difficile using selective solid and 
enrichment media. Thirty-two (39.5%) of 81 stool samples yielded C. difficile. 
There were significant differences in isolation rates between clinics, 61.0% of 
animals being positive at one clinic compared to 17.5% at the other (Chi-square, 
P less than 0.005). Of 29 animals receiving antibiotics, 15 (52.0%) harboured C. 
difficile while 11 (23.9%) of 46 animals not receiving antibiotics were positive 
(Chi-square, P less than 0.01). There was no difference in carriage rate between 
cats (38.1%) and dogs (40.0%). The environment at both veterinary clinics was 
surveyed for the presence of C. difficile. Fifteen of 20 sites at one clinic 
were positive compared to 6 of 14 sites at the other clinic. Both cytotoxigenic 
and noncytotoxigenic isolates of C. difficile were recovered from animals and 
environmental sites. These findings suggest that household pets may be a 
potentially significant reservoir of infection with C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1017/s0950268800049359
PMCID: PMC2272098
PMID: 1752313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Zoonoses Public Health. 2011 May;58(3):192-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1863-2378.2010.01338.x.

Carriage of Clostridium difficile and other enteric pathogens among a 4-H 
avocational cohort.

McNamara SE(1), Abdujamilova N, Somsel P, Gordoncillo MJ, DeDecker JM, Bartlett 
PC.

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases Division, Bureau of Laboratories, Michigan Department of 
Community Health, Lansing, MI, USA.

Clostridium difficile (CD), Salmonella, Campylobacter and enterohemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli (EHEC) are major causes of morbidity in a variety of enteric 
diseases in humans and animals, but subclinical carriage in both is probably 
more common than are clinical cases. Little is known regarding the prevalence of 
these pathogens in animals raised for exhibit at Michigan county fairs or the 
frequency with which Michigan citizens raising these animals may have been 
subclinically colonized. To address these issues, 361 fecal specimens from 158 
humans and 203 of their farm animals were cultured for CD, Salmonella and 
Campylobacter. Additionally, 50 people and their cattle were tested for EHEC. No 
EHEC, Salmonella or Campylobacter were detected. However, 16 specimens (4.4%) 
were positive for CD: 13 humans, two horses and one pig. None of the farm animal 
specimens submitted by any of the 13 CD-positive humans were positive for CD. 
Strain characterization [toxinotype, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE)] 
demonstrated that the human CD isolates were similar to what has been reported 
previously in the general US population. We conclude that horses and farm 
animals (cattle, sheep, goats and swine) at 1-2 months before market weight 
showed no evidence of wide-spread carriage of the common enteric pathogens, 
including the recently reported CD toxinotype V. These results provide no 
support to the hypothesis that 4-H members or others visiting county fair animal 
husbandry projects in these counties may be at increased risk for acquisition of 
CD, Salmonella, Campylobacter or EHEC from animals.

© 2010 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2010.01338.x
PMID: 20529211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Data Brief. 2017 Jul 15;14:88-100. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2017.07.029. eCollection 
2017 Oct.

Data from a survey of Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium difficile shedding 
by dogs and cats in the Madrid region (Spain), including phenotypic and genetic 
characteristics of recovered isolates.

Álvarez-Pérez S(1), Blanco JL(1), Harmanus C(2), Kuijper EJ(2), García ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary, Universidad Complutense 
de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Center of Infectious Diseases, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

This article contains information related to a recent survey of the prevalence 
of fecal shedding of Clostridium perfringens and C. difficile by dogs and cats 
attended in veterinary clinics located in the Madrid region (Spain). 
Specifically, we provide detailed information about the clinics that 
participated in the survey, the demographic and clinic characteristics of 
recruited animals and the genetic and phenotypic characteristics (including 
antimicrobial susceptibility data), of recovered bacterial isolates.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2017.07.029
PMCID: PMC5537374
PMID: 28795086


187. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45608. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045608. Epub 2012 Sep 18.

Temporal differential proteomes of Clostridium difficile in the pig 
ileal-ligated loop model.

Janvilisri T(1), Scaria J, Teng CH, McDonough SP, Gleed RD, Fubini SL, Zhang S, 
Akey B, Chang YF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

The impact of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) on healthcare is becoming 
increasingly recognized as it represents a major cause of nosocomial diarrhea. A 
rising number of CDI cases and outbreaks have been reported worldwide. Here, we 
developed the pig ileal-ligated loop model for semi-quantitative analysis 
comparing temporal differential proteomes in C. difficile following in vivo 
incubation with in vitro growth using isobaric tags for relative and absolute 
quantification (iTRAQ). Proteins retrieved from the in vitro cultures and the 
loop contents after 4, 8, and 12 h in vivo incubation were subjected to 
in-solution digestion, iTRAQ labeling, two-dimensional liquid 
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry and statistical analyses. From a total 
of 1152 distinct proteins identified in this study, 705 proteins were available 
for quantitative measures at all time points in both biological and technical 
replicates; 109 proteins were found to be differentially expressed. With 
analysis of clusters of orthologous group and protein-protein network 
interactions, we identified the proteins that might play roles in adaptive 
responses to the host environment, hence enhancing pathogenicity during CDI. 
This report represents the quantitative proteomic analysis of C. difficile that 
demonstrates time-dependent protein expression changes under conditions that 
mimic in vivo infection and identifies potential candidates for diagnostic or 
therapeutic measures.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045608
PMCID: PMC3445491
PMID: 23029131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The corresponding author 
YFC is a PLOS ONE Editorial Board member. This does not alter his adherence to 
all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


188. Infect Immun. 2014 Oct;82(10):4276-91. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02323-14. Epub 2014 Jul 
28.

Conserved oligopeptide permeases modulate sporulation initiation in Clostridium 
difficile.

Edwards AN(1), Nawrocki KL(1), McBride SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA shonna.mcbride@emory.edu.

The anaerobic gastrointestinal pathogen Clostridium difficile must form a 
metabolically dormant spore to survive in oxygenic environments and be 
transmitted from host to host. The regulatory factors by which C. difficile 
initiates and controls the early stages of sporulation in C. difficile are not 
highly conserved in other Clostridium or Bacillus species. Here, we investigated 
the role of two conserved oligopeptide permeases, Opp and App, in the regulation 
of sporulation in C. difficile. These permeases are known to positively affect 
sporulation in Bacillus species through the import of sporulation-specific 
quorum-sensing peptides. In contrast to other spore-forming bacteria, we 
discovered that inactivating these permeases in C. difficile resulted in the 
earlier expression of early sporulation genes and increased sporulation in 
vitro. Furthermore, disruption of opp and app resulted in greater virulence and 
increased the amounts of spores recovered from feces in the hamster model of C. 
difficile infection. Our data suggest that Opp and App indirectly inhibit 
sporulation, likely through the activities of the transcriptional regulator SinR 
and its inhibitor, SinI. Taken together, these results indicate that the Opp and 
App transporters serve a different function in controlling sporulation and 
virulence in C. difficile than in Bacillus subtilis and suggest that nutrient 
availability plays a significant role in pathogenesis and sporulation in vivo. 
This study suggests a link between the nutritional status of the environment and 
sporulation initiation in C. difficile.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02323-14
PMCID: PMC4187847
PMID: 25069979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Vet Intern Med. 2010 Jan-Feb;24(1):97-103. doi: 
10.1111/j.1939-1676.2009.0418.x.

Prevalence of diarrhea and enteropathogens in racing sled dogs.

McKenzie E(1), Riehl J, Banse H, Kass PH, Nelson S Jr, Marks SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Oregon State 
University, 227 Magruder Hall, Corvallis, OR 97333, USA. 
erica.mckenzie@oregonstate.edu

BACKGROUND: Diarrhea is highly prevalent in racing sled dogs, although the 
underlying causes are poorly understood.
HYPOTHESIS: Clostridium perfringens enterotoxin (CPE) and Clostridium difficile 
Toxin A and B are associated with diarrhea in racing sled dogs.
ANIMALS: One hundred and thirty-five sled dogs.
METHODS: Freshly voided feces were obtained from 55 dogs before racing and from 
80 dogs after 400 miles of racing. Samples were visually scored for diarrhea, 
mucus, blood, and melena. CPE and C. difficile Toxin A and B were detected by 
ELISA. Samples were cultured for C. perfringens, C. difficile, Campylobacter, 
Salmonella, and Escherichia coli O157; Giardia and Cryptosporidium spp. were 
detected via immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Diarrhea occurred in 36% of dogs during racing, and hematochezia, fecal 
mucus or melena, or all 3 occurred in 57.5% of dogs. Salmonella was isolated 
from 78.2% of dogs before racing, and from 71.3% of dogs during racing. C. 
perfringens and C. difficile were isolated from 100 and 58.2% of dogs before 
racing, and from 95 and 36.3% of dogs during racing. Dogs were more likely to 
test positive for CPE during than before racing (18.8 versus 5.5%, P = .021); 
however, no enteropathogens or their respective toxins were significantly 
associated with hematochezia or diarrhea.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Sled dogs participating in long distance 
racing have a high prevalence of diarrhea and hematochezia that is not 
associated with common enteropathogens. It is possible that diarrhea and 
hematochezia represent the effect of prolonged exercise on the gastrointestinal 
tract.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-1676.2009.0418.x
PMID: 19925573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Gut Microbes. 2014 Mar-Apr;5(2):225-32. doi: 10.4161/gmic.27712. Epub 2014 Jan 
22.

Vaccination against Clostridium difficile using toxin fragments: Observations 
and analysis in animal models.

Spencer J(1), Leuzzi R(2), Buckley A(1), Irvine J(1), Candlish D(1), Scarselli 
M(2), Douce GR(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity, and Inflammation; College of Medicine, 
Veterinary and Life Sciences; University of Glasgow; Glasgow, UK.
(2)Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics; Siena, Italy.

Clostridium difficile is a major cause of antibiotic associated diarrhea. 
Recently, we have shown that effective protection can be mediated in hamsters 
through the inclusion of specific recombinant fragments from toxin A and B in a 
systemically delivered vaccine. Interestingly while neutralizing antibodies to 
the binding domains of both toxin A and B are moderately protective, enhanced 
survival is observed when fragments from the glucosyltransferase region of toxin 
B replace those from the binding domain of this toxin. In this addendum, we 
discuss additional information that has been derived from such vaccination 
studies. This includes observations on efficacy and cross-protection against 
different ribotypes mediated by these vaccines and the challenges that remain 
for a vaccine which prevents clinical symptoms but not colonization. The use and 
value of vaccination both in the prevention of infection and for treatment of 
disease relapse will be discussed.

DOI: 10.4161/gmic.27712
PMCID: PMC4063849
PMID: 24637800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Sep;51(9):3094-6. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00879-13. Epub 2013 
Jun 26.

Evaluation of cycloserine-cefoxitin fructose agar (CCFA), CCFA with horse blood 
and taurocholate, and cycloserine-cefoxitin mannitol broth with taurocholate and 
lysozyme for recovery of Clostridium difficile isolates from fecal samples.

Tyrrell KL(1), Citron DM, Leoncio ES, Merriam CV, Goldstein EJ.

Author information:
(1)RM Alden Research Laboratory, Culver City, California, USA.

Cycloserine-cefoxitin fructose agar (CCFA), CCFA with horse blood and 
taurocholate (CCFA-HT), and cycloserine-cefoxitin mannitol broth with 
taurocholate and lysozyme (CCMB-TAL) were compared for recovery of Clostridium 
difficile from 120 stool specimens. Compared to CCFA, CCFA-HT enhanced C. 
difficile growth and improved recovery by 4%. In a separate study, 9% (8/91) of 
stool samples previously C. difficile negative on plate medium were C. difficile 
positive when cultured in CCMB-TAL.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00879-13
PMCID: PMC3754669
PMID: 23804392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Front Microbiol. 2019 Apr 2;10:601. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00601. eCollection 
2019.

Corrigendum: Bacteroides fragilis Prevents Clostridium difficile Infection in a 
Mouse Model by Restoring Gut Barrier and Microbiome Regulation.

Deng H(1), Yang S(1), Zhang Y(1), Qian K(1), Zhang Z(1), Liu Y(2), Wang Y(2), 
Bai Y(1), Fan H(3), Zhao X(1), Zhi F(1).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Gastroenterology, Department of 
Gastroenterology, Institute of Gastroenterology of Guangdong Province, Nanfang 
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Guangzhou ZhiYi Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China.
(3)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of 
Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

Erratum for
    Front Microbiol. 2018 Dec 21;9:2976.

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02976.].

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00601
PMCID: PMC6454232
PMID: 31001213


193. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2009 Jun 1;234(11):1404-17. doi: 10.2460/javma.234.11.1404.

Incidence of acquisition of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, 
Clostridium difficile, and other health-care-associated pathogens by dogs that 
participate in animal-assisted interventions.

Lefebvre SL(1), Reid-Smith RJ, Waltner-Toews D, Weese JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether dogs that visited human health-care facilities 
were at greater risk of acquiring certain health-care-associated pathogens, 
compared with dogs performing animal-assisted interventions in other settings, 
and to identify specific behaviors of dogs associated with an increased risk of 
acquiring these pathogens.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort and nested case-control studies.
ANIMALS: 96 dogs that visited human health-care facilities and 98 dogs involved 
in other animal-assisted interventions.
PROCEDURES: Fecal samples and nasal swab specimens were collected from dogs at 
the time of recruitment and every 2 months for 1 year and were tested for 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Clostridium difficile, and 
other selected bacteria. Information was also obtained on facilities visited 
during animal-assisted interventions, dog diet, dog illnesses, and antimicrobial 
use within the home. At the end of the study, dog handlers were asked about the 
behavior of their dogs during visits to health-care facilities.
RESULTS: Rates of acquisition of MRSA and C difficile were 4.7 and 2.4 times as 
high, respectively, among dogs that visited human health-care facilities, 
compared with rates among dogs involved in other animal-assisted interventions. 
Among dogs that visited human health-care facilities, those that licked patients 
or accepted treats during visits were more likely to be positive for MRSA and C 
difficile than were dogs that did not lick patients or accept treats.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Results suggested that dogs that visited 
human health-care facilities were at risk of acquiring MRSA and C difficile, 
particularly when they licked patients or accepted treats during visits.

DOI: 10.2460/javma.234.11.1404
PMID: 19480620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Anaerobe. 2017 Dec;48:249-256. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.10.006. Epub 2017 
Oct 12.

The role of purified Clostridium difficile glucosylating toxins in disease 
pathogenesis utilizing a murine cecum injection model.

Zhang Y(1), Yang Z(1), Gao S(1), Hamza T(1), Yfantis HG(2), Lipsky M(3), Feng 
H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University of Maryland School of 
Dentistry, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, VAMHCS, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University of Maryland School of 
Dentistry, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic address: HFeng@umaryland.edu.

Most pathogenic Clostridium difficile produce two major exotoxins TcdA and TcdB, 
in the absence of which the bacterium is non-pathogenic. While it is important 
to investigate the role of each toxin in the pathogenesis of C. difficile 
infection (CDI) using isogenic strains, it is impossible to precisely control 
the expression levels of individual toxins and exclude bacterial factors that 
may contribute to the toxins' effects during infection. In this study, we 
utilized an acute intestinal disease model by injecting purified toxins directly 
into mouse cecum after a midline laparotomy. We evaluated the physical condition 
of mice by clinical score and survival, and the intestinal tissue damage and 
inflammation by histology. Depending on the dose of the toxins, mice developed 
mild to severe colitis, experienced diarrhea or rapidly died. We found that both 
purified TcdA and TcdB were able to induce clinical disease, intestinal 
inflammation, and tissue damage that resembled CDI. TcdA was significantly 
faster in inducing intestinal inflammation and tissue damage, and was 
approximately five times more potent than TcdB in terms of inducing severe gut 
disease and death outcomes in mice. Moreover, we found that the two toxins had 
significant synergistic effects on disease induction. Comparison of the in vivo 
toxicity of TcdB from clinical strains revealed that TcdB from an epidemic RT 
027 strain was more toxic than the others. Our study thus demonstrates that both 
TcdA and TcdB, independent of other factors from C. difficile bacterium, are 
able to cause disease that resembles CDI and highlights the importance of 
targeting both toxins for vaccines and therapeutics against the disease.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.10.006
PMCID: PMC5792825
PMID: 29031928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Anaerobe. 2018 Jun;51:120-123. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.04.017. Epub 2018 
May 2.

Effect of DS-2969b, a novel GyrB inhibitor, on rat and monkey intestinal 
microbiota.

Kumar M(1), Mathur T(1), Joshi V(1), Upadhyay DJ(1), Inoue SI(2), Masuda N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Daiichi Sankyo India Pharma Private Limited, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India.
(2)Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Daiichi Sankyo India Pharma Private Limited, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India. Electronic address: 
masuda.nobuhisa.up@daiichisankyo.co.jp.

DS-2969b, a novel GyrB inhibitor, transiently and reversibly altered the counts 
of limited intestinal microbiota at around 10 μg/g of faecal levels in rats and 
monkeys. Considering the high activity of DS-2969b against Clostridium 
difficile, 10 μg/g of faecal levels would be sufficient for clearing 
C. difficile from the intestine.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.04.017
PMID: 29758524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015 Jan;81(1):119-23. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03032-14. Epub 
2014 Oct 17.

Nationwide surveillance study of Clostridium difficile in Australian neonatal 
pigs shows high prevalence and heterogeneity of PCR ribotypes.

Knight DR(1), Squire MM(1), Riley TV(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology & Immunology, School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The 
University of Western Australia, Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre, Nedlands, 
Western Australia, Australia.
(2)Microbiology & Immunology, School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The 
University of Western Australia, Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre, Nedlands, 
Western Australia, Australia Department of Microbiology, PathWest Laboratory 
Medicine, Queen Elizabeth II Medical Centre, Nedlands, Western Australia, 
Australia thomas.riley@uwa.edu.au.

Clostridium difficile is an important enteric pathogen of humans and the cause 
of diarrhea and enteritis in neonatal pigs. Outside Australia, prevalence in 
piglets can be up to 73%, with a single PCR ribotype (RT), 078, predominating. 
We investigated the prevalence and genotype of C. difficile in Australian pig 
herds. Rectal swabs (n = 229) were collected from piglets aged <7 days from 21 
farms across Australia. Selective culture for C. difficile was performed and 
isolates characterized by PCR for toxin genes and PCR ribotyping. C. difficile 
was isolated from 52% of samples by direct culture on chromogenic agar and 67% 
by enrichment culture (P = 0.001). No association between C. difficile recovery 
or genotype and diarrheic status of either farm or piglets was found. The 
majority (87%; 130/154) of isolates were toxigenic. Typing revealed 23 different 
RTs, several of which are known to cause disease in humans, including RT014, 
which was isolated most commonly (23%; 36/154). RT078 was not detected. This 
study shows that colonization of Australian neonatal piglets with C. difficile 
is widespread in the herds sampled.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03032-14
PMCID: PMC4272713
PMID: 25326297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Infect Immun. 1986 Nov;54(2):354-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.54.2.354-358.1986.

Interaction of Clostridium difficile and Escherichia coli with microfloras in 
continuous-flow cultures and gnotobiotic mice.

Wilson KH, Freter R.

We studied the interactions between the entire cecal flora of hamsters and the 
pathogens Clostridium difficile and Escherichia coli in gnotobiotic mice and in 
a continuous-flow (CF) culture system in which the growth medium consisted of an 
extract of fecal pellets from germfree mice. CF cultures and germfree mice were 
colonized first with C. difficile and E. coli and then with the cecal flora of 
hamsters. Both in vivo and in vitro hamster flora markedly suppressed the 
potential pathogens. Contents of CF cultures inoculated with hamster flora were 
introduced into gnotobiotic mice previously colonized with C. difficile and E. 
coli. These mice were compared with mice given homogenates of hamster ceca. In 
both groups, the C. difficile population decreased by a factor of more than 
10(6) and the E. coli population decreased by a factor of 10(4) to 10(5). CF 
culture contents also reduced the size of the dilated germfree mouse cecum to 
normal. When veal infusion broth was used as a medium, contents of CF cultures 
colonized with hamster flora failed to eliminate C. difficile from mice. Thus, 
the extract of fecal pellets appeared to contain a substance important for 
sustained colonization by important components of the cecal flora. We also 
studied the ability of collections of isolates to suppress the potential 
pathogens in both gnotobiotic mice and CF cultures. A total of 150 isolates 
obtained from predominant hamster flora at the ecologic climax stage (C flora) 
suppressed C. difficile and E. coli to 10 and 1 to 3%, respectively, of the 
population sizes attained in monoassociated mice. A total of 67 isolates 
obtained during ecologic succession combined with a C flora consisting of 100 
isolates suppressed the potential pathogens to 0.3 and 0.03% of their original 
levels, respectively. Similar degrees of suppression occurred in CF cultures, 
further indicating that anaerobic CF cultures are promising models for 
investigation of the microbial ecology of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.54.2.354-358.1986
PMCID: PMC260168
PMID: 3533778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Infect Immun. 2013 Aug;81(8):2851-60. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01341-12. Epub 2013 May 
28.

Protective efficacy induced by recombinant Clostridium difficile toxin 
fragments.

Leuzzi R(1), Spencer J, Buckley A, Brettoni C, Martinelli M, Tulli L, Marchi S, 
Luzzi E, Irvine J, Candlish D, Veggi D, Pansegrau W, Fiaschi L, Savino S, 
Swennen E, Cakici O, Oviedo-Orta E, Giraldi M, Baudner B, D'Urzo N, Maione D, 
Soriani M, Rappuoli R, Pizza M, Douce GR, Scarselli M.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics SRL, Siena, Italy.

Clostridium difficile is a spore-forming bacterium that can reside in animals 
and humans. C. difficile infection causes a variety of clinical symptoms, 
ranging from diarrhea to fulminant colitis. Disease is mediated by TcdA and 
TcdB, two large enterotoxins released by C. difficile during colonization of the 
gut. In this study, we evaluated the ability of recombinant toxin fragments to 
induce neutralizing antibodies in mice. The protective efficacies of the most 
promising candidates were then evaluated in a hamster model of disease. While 
limited protection was observed with some combinations, coadministration of a 
cell binding domain fragment of TcdA (TcdA-B1) and the glucosyltransferase 
moiety of TcdB (TcdB-GT) induced systemic IgGs which neutralized both toxins and 
protected vaccinated animals from death following challenge with two strains of 
C. difficile. Further characterization revealed that despite high concentrations 
of toxin in the gut lumens of vaccinated animals during the acute phase of the 
disease, pathological damage was minimized. Assessment of gut contents revealed 
the presence of TcdA and TcdB antibodies, suggesting that systemic vaccination 
with this pair of recombinant polypeptides can limit the disease caused by toxin 
production during C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01341-12
PMCID: PMC3719595
PMID: 23716610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 May;24(5):696-703. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1401.01059.

Effect of antisera from Clostridium difficile-infected mice on toxin-A-induced 
colonic epithelial cell death signaling.

Kim DH(1), Lee IH, Nam ST, Nam HJ, Kang JK, Seok H, Hwang JS, Kim H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin University, 
Pocheon 487-711, Republic of Korea.

Clostridium difficile causes mucosal damage and diarrhea by releasing two 
exotoxins: toxin A and toxin B. C. difficile colitis is associated with 
alterations in bowel flora and the failure to mount an effective antibody 
response. The aim of the current study was to investigate whether antitoxin sera 
prevent toxin-A-induced apoptosis, cytoskeletal disaggregation, cell detachment, 
and tight junction loss in cultured colonic epithelial cells. Serum samples were 
isolated from mice that survived a C. difficile infection following antibiotic 
treatment, and the antitoxin effects of these samples were investigated in 
toxin-A-exposed HT29 colonic epithelial cells and a toxin-A-induced animal model 
of gut inflammation. Unchallenged mice did not produce IgG against toxin A, 
whereas serum (antiserum) from C. difficile-challenged mice showed significant 
IgG responses against toxin A. Treatment with the antiserum markedly inhibited 
mucosal damage and inflammation in the toxin-A-treated mouse model. In contrast 
to control mouse serum, the antiserum also markedly inhibited toxin-A-induced 
DNA fragmentation, dephosphorylation of paxillin and Epo receptor (EpoR), 
deacetylation of tubulin, and upregulation of p21(WAF1/CIP1) and p53. Taken 
together, these results reveal that the generated antitoxin serum has 
biotherapeutic effects in preventing various C. difficile toxin-A-induced 
cellular toxicities.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1401.01059
PMID: 24509250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Dec 7;60(2):968-81. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01774-15. 
Print 2016 Feb.

Bacteriophage Combinations Significantly Reduce Clostridium difficile Growth In 
Vitro and Proliferation In Vivo.

Nale JY(1), Spencer J(2), Hargreaves KR(1), Buckley AM(2), Trzepiński P(1), 
Douce GR(3), Clokie MR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, England, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical, 
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical, 
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland, United 
Kingdom Gillian.Douce@glasgow.ac.uk mrjc1@le.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, 
Leicester, England, United Kingdom Gillian.Douce@glasgow.ac.uk mrjc1@le.ac.uk.

The microbiome dysbiosis caused by antibiotic treatment has been associated with 
both susceptibility to and relapse of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). 
Bacteriophage (phage) therapy offers target specificity and dose amplification 
in situ, but few studies have focused on its use in CDI treatment. This mainly 
reflects the lack of strictly virulent phages that target this pathogen. While 
it is widely accepted that temperate phages are unsuitable for therapeutic 
purposes due to their transduction potential, analysis of seven C. difficile 
phages confirmed that this impact could be curtailed by the application of 
multiple phage types. Here, host range analysis of six myoviruses and one 
siphovirus was conducted on 80 strains representing 21 major epidemic and 
clinically severe ribotypes. The phages had complementary coverage, lysing 18 
and 62 of the ribotypes and strains tested, respectively. Single-phage 
treatments of ribotype 076, 014/020, and 027 strains showed an initial reduction 
in the bacterial load followed by the emergence of phage-resistant colonies. 
However, these colonies remained susceptible to infection with an unrelated 
phage. In contrast, specific phage combinations caused the complete lysis of C. 
difficile in vitro and prevented the appearance of resistant/lysogenic clones. 
Using a hamster model, the oral delivery of optimized phage combinations 
resulted in reduced C. difficile colonization at 36 h postinfection. 
Interestingly, free phages were recovered from the bowel at this time. In a 
challenge model of the disease, phage treatment delayed the onset of symptoms by 
33 h compared to the time of onset of symptoms in untreated animals. These data 
demonstrate the therapeutic potential of phage combinations to treat CDI.

Copyright © 2016 Nale et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01774-15
PMCID: PMC4750681
PMID: 26643348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Infect Immun. 2016 May 24;84(6):1902-1916. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00207-16. Print 2016 
Jun.

The Clostridium difficile Dlt Pathway Is Controlled by the Extracytoplasmic 
Function Sigma Factor σV in Response to Lysozyme.

Woods EC(1), Nawrocki KL(1), Suárez JM(1), McBride SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Antibiotic Resistance 
Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Antibiotic Resistance 
Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA 
shonna.mcbride@emory.edu.

Clostridium difficile (also known as Peptoclostridium difficile) is a major 
nosocomial pathogen and a leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea 
throughout the world. Colonization of the intestinal tract is necessary for C. 
difficile to cause disease. Host-produced antimicrobial proteins (AMPs), such as 
lysozyme, are present in the intestinal tract and can deter colonization by many 
bacterial pathogens, and yet C. difficile is able to survive in the colon in the 
presence of these AMPs. Our prior studies established that the Dlt pathway, 
which increases the surface charge of the bacterium by addition of d-alanine to 
teichoic acids, is important for C. difficile resistance to a variety of AMPs. 
We sought to determine what genetic mechanisms regulate expression of the Dlt 
pathway. In this study, we show that a dlt null mutant is severely attenuated 
for growth in lysozyme and that expression of the dltDABC operon is induced in 
response to lysozyme. Moreover, we found that a mutant lacking the 
extracytoplasmic function (ECF) sigma factor σ(V) does not induce dlt expression 
in response to lysozyme, indicating that σ(V) is required for regulation of 
lysozyme-dependent d-alanylation of the cell wall. Using reporter gene fusions 
and 5' RACE (rapid amplification of cDNA ends) analysis, we identified promoter 
elements necessary for lysozyme-dependent and lysozyme-independent dlt 
expression. In addition, we observed that both a sigV mutant and a dlt mutant 
are more virulent in a hamster model of infection. These findings demonstrate 
that cell wall d-alanylation in C. difficile is induced by lysozyme in a 
σ(V)-dependent manner and that this pathway impacts virulence in vivo.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00207-16
PMCID: PMC4907151
PMID: 27068095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004 Oct;48(10):3975-9. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.48.10.3975-3979.2004.

Rifalazil treats and prevents relapse of clostridium difficile-associated 
diarrhea in hamsters.

Anton PM(1), O'Brien M, Kokkotou E, Eisenstein B, Michaelis A, Rothstein D, 
Paraschos S, Kelly CP, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Division of Gastroenterology, Dana 601, 
330 Brookline Ave., Boston, MA 02215, USA. cpothoul@bidmc.harvard.edu

Although vancomycin and metronidazole effectively treat Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea and colitis (CDAD), their use is associated with a 
high incidence of relapsing C. difficile infection. Rifalazil is a new 
benzoxazinorifamycin that possesses activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
and gram-positive bacteria. Here we compared rifalazil and vancomycin for 
effectiveness in preventing or treating clindamycin-induced cecitis in a hamster 
model of CDAD. Golden Syrian hamsters were injected subcutaneously with 
clindamycin phosphate (10 mg/kg), followed 24 h later by C. difficile gavage. 
Hamsters received by gavage for 5 days vehicle, vancomycin (50 mg/kg), or 
rifalazil (20 mg/kg) either simultaneously with (prophylactic protocol) or 24 h 
after C. difficile administration (treatment protocol). While all 
vehicle-administered animals became moribund within 48 h of C. difficile 
administration, no rifalazil- or vancomycin-treated animals in either protocol 
showed signs of morbidity after 7 days. Ceca of rifalazil-treated animals showed 
absence of epithelial cell damage, significantly reduced congestion and edema, 
and less, but not statistically significantly less, neutrophil infiltration 
compared to those of vehicle-treated animals. In contrast, vancomycin-treated 
animals demonstrated severe epithelial cell damage and mildly reduced congestion 
and edema. Moreover, hamsters relapsed and tested C. difficile toxin positive 
(by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) 10 to 15 days after discontinuation of 
vancomycin treatment. None of the rifalazil-treated hamsters showed signs of 
disease or presence of toxins in their feces 30 days after discontinuation of 
treatment. Our results indicate that once daily rifalazil may be superior to 
vancomycin for curative treatment of CDAD.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.48.10.3975-3979.2004
PMCID: PMC521872
PMID: 15388461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Ann Lab Med. 2014 Nov;34(6):439-45. doi: 10.3343/alm.2014.34.6.439. Epub 2014 
Oct 28.

Comparison of supplemented Brucella agar and modified Clostridium difficile agar 
for antimicrobial susceptibility testing of Clostridium difficile.

Kim GH(1), Kim J(2), Pai H(2), Kang JO(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Hanyang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) of Clostridium difficile 
is increasingly important because of the rise in resistant strains. The standard 
medium for the AST of C. difficile is supplemented Brucella agar (sBA), but we 
found that the growth of C. difficile on sBA was not optimal. Because active 
growth is critical for reliable AST, we developed a new, modified C. difficile 
(mCD) agar. C. difficile grew better on mCD agar than on sBA.
METHODS: C. difficile isolates were collected from patients with 
healthcare-associated diarrhea. sBA medium was prepared according to the CLSI 
guidelines. Homemade mCD agar containing taurocholate, L-cysteine hydrochloride, 
and 7% horse blood was used. For 171 C. difficile isolates, we compared the agar 
dilution AST results from mCD agar with those from sBA.
RESULTS: No significant differences were observed in the 50% minimal inhibitory 
concentration (MIC50) and 90% minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC90) of 
clindamycin (CLI), metronidazole (MTZ), moxifloxacin (MXF), 
piperacillin-tazobactam (PTZ), and rifaximin (RIX), but the values for 
vancomycin (VAN) were two-fold higher on mCD agar than on sBA. The MICs of CLI, 
MXF, and RIX were in 100% agreement within two-fold dilutions, but for MTZ, VAN, 
and PTZ, 13.7%, 0.6%, and 3.1% of the isolates, respectively, were outside the 
acceptable range.
CONCLUSIONS: The MIC ranges, MIC50 and MIC90, were acceptable when AST was 
performed on mCD agar. Thus, mCD agar could be used as a substitute medium for 
the AST of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.3343/alm.2014.34.6.439
PMCID: PMC4215411
PMID: 25368819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflicts of interest relevant to 
this article were reported.


204. Anaerobe. 2016 Feb;37:78-84. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.10.010. Epub 2015 Oct 
24.

Immunogenic properties of the surface layer precursor of Clostridium difficile 
and vaccination assays in animal models.

Bruxelle JF(1), Mizrahi A(1), Hoys S(1), Collignon A(1), Janoir C(1), Péchiné 
S(2).

Author information:
(1)EA 4043 "Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé" (UBaPS), Univ. Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, 92290 Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(2)EA 4043 "Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé" (UBaPS), Univ. Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, 92290 Châtenay-Malabry, France. Electronic address: 
severine.pechine@u-psud.fr.

Clostridium difficile is an opportunistic pathogen causing gut inflammation 
generally associated with an intestinal dysbiosis due to antibiotics. Several 
virulence factors have been identified as playing a key role in gut 
colonization. The surface-layer proteins, comprised of two proteins, the high 
molecular weight SlpA (HMW-SLP) and the low molecular weight SlpA (LMW-SLP), are 
the most abundant proteins on the C. difficile surface. These two proteins are 
derived from the Cwp84-mediated cleavage of a single precursor protein SlpA. In 
this study, we assessed the immunogenic properties of a recombinant SlpA 
precursor derived from a toxigenic C. difficile strain (630) and its protective 
effect as a vaccine antigen co-administered with the cholera toxin as an 
adjuvant in both hamster and mouse models. First, we confirmed the 
immunogenicity of SlpA in humans. Sera from patients with C. difficile infection 
were analyzed by ELISA. Patients with CDI have a greater number of SlpA 
antibodies than healthy patients, confirming the immunogenicity of this protein 
during the pathogenic process. Then, rectal vaccination assays were performed in 
both conventional hamsters and mice. The animals' sera were sampled before and 
after vaccination, and were analyzed by ELISA. In addition, in the mouse model, 
feces were sampled after vaccination and IgA directed against SlpA were detected 
by ELISA. In both models, the intestinal colonization was evaluated by fecal 
bacterial count after challenge. Intra-rectal vaccination with SlpA and cholera 
toxin as an adjuvant induced a local and systemic humoral immune response in 
mice and hamsters potentially responsible for the weak decrease of C. difficile 
colonization in mice and the partial protection observed in a lethal-hamster 
model.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2015.10.010
PMID: 26505926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Apr;25(4):832-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.06135.x. Epub 2010 Jan 14.

Effect of biotherapeutics on cyclosporin-induced Clostridium difficile infection 
in mice.

Kaur S(1), Vaishnavi C, Ray P, Kochhar R, Prasad KK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education 
and Research, Chandigarh, India.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Immunosuppressive therapy may precipitate Clostridium 
difficile associated disease (CDAD). We evaluated the role of cyclosporin in the 
development of CDAD in the experimental mouse model and studied the effect of 
probiotic and epidermal growth factor (EGF) as biotherapeutics measures.
METHODS: BALB/c mice (n = 24) were divided into four groups. Group I animals not 
given any inoculum served as controls. Animals in the remaining three groups 
(Group II, III and IV) were given cyclosporin daily from days 1-7 followed by C. 
difficile inoculum on day 8. Additionally, the animals received Lactobacillus 
acidophilus (Group III) and EGF (Group IV) for one-week post C. difficile 
challenge. The animals were evaluated for colonization and toxin production by 
C. difficile, myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity and histopathological changes.
RESULTS: Clostridium difficile was colonized and elaborated its toxins in 
animals receiving cyclosporin and C. difficile. MPO activity was significantly 
higher (P < 0.05) and histopathological epithelial damage, cryptitis and acute 
inflammatory changes were seen in the cecum and colon. C. difficile count, 
toxins A and B titers and MPO activity were significantly lowered (P < 0.05) in 
animals receiving probiotic and EGF. Histopathologically, mucodepletion and 
inflammatory infiltrate were decreased in the biotherapeutic receiving animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclosporin led to the development of mild to moderate CDAD in 
animals. Administration of biotherapeutics reduced the severity of CDAD. Future 
clinical trials are needed for further investigation of these potential 
biotherapeutic measures.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2009.06135.x
PMID: 20074161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2009 May;63(5):964-71. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkp042. Epub 
2009 Feb 26.

Inhibitory effect of REP3123 on toxin and spore formation in Clostridium 
difficile, and in vivo efficacy in a hamster gastrointestinal infection model.

Ochsner UA(1), Bell SJ, O'Leary AL, Hoang T, Stone KC, Young CL, Critchley IA, 
Janjic N.

Author information:
(1)Replidyne, Inc., Louisville, CO 80027, USA. ursochsner@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: REP3123 is a fully synthetic methionyl-tRNA synthetase inhibitor in 
pre-clinical development as a novel agent to treat Clostridium difficile 
infection (CDI). This novel agent was investigated for its ability to block the 
production of toxins and spores, and was tested for efficacy in vivo in a 
hamster model.
METHODS: Clostridial toxin levels were determined qualitatively using monoclonal 
antibodies and by cytotoxicity assays. Spores were detected by staining and by 
quantitative dilution plating after ethanol treatment. Efficacy of REP3123 was 
tested in a clindamycin-induced C. difficile hamster gastrointestinal (GI) 
infection model.
RESULTS: REP3123 at concentrations as low as 1 mg/L inhibited de novo toxin 
production in high cell density, stationary phase cultures of C. difficile. 
Among comparator agents currently used for CDI therapy, vancomycin required much 
higher levels of 20 mg/L, and metronidazole had no effect on toxin levels. 
REP3123 caused a >10-fold reduction of the sporulation rate in vitro. Vancomycin 
and, in particular, metronidazole appeared to promote the formation of spores. 
REP3123, at concentrations as low as 0.5 mg/kg, demonstrated efficacy in the 
hamster model of CDI and was superior to vancomycin in the overall survival of 
the animals at the end of the study (33 days).
CONCLUSIONS: REP3123 inhibited growth of C. difficile, affected the production 
of toxins and spores and demonstrated superior efficacy compared with vancomycin 
in the hamster GI infection model. This agent may be a promising candidate for 
CDI treatment; in particular, the inhibition of toxin production and spore 
formation may reduce the severity and spread of the disease, respectively.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkp042
PMID: 19251726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Front Microbiol. 2017 Sep 21;8:1793. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01793. eCollection 
2017.

Inducible Expression of spo0A as a Universal Tool for Studying Sporulation in 
Clostridium difficile.

Dembek M(1), Willing SE(2), Hong HA(2), Hosseini S(2), Salgado PS(1), Cutting 
SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle UniversityNewcastle 
upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of LondonLondon, 
United Kingdom.

Clostridium difficile remains a leading nosocomial pathogen, putting 
considerable strain on the healthcare system. The ability to form endospores, 
highly resistant to environmental insults, is key to its persistence and 
transmission. However, important differences exist between the sporulation 
pathways of C. difficile and the model Gram-positive organism Bacillus subtilis. 
Amongst the challenges in studying sporulation in C. difficile is the relatively 
poor levels of sporulation and high heterogeneity in the sporulation process. To 
overcome these limitations we placed Ptet regulatory elements upstream of the 
master regulator of sporulation, spo0A, generating a new strain that can be 
artificially induced to sporulate by addition of anhydrotetracycline (ATc). We 
demonstrate that this strain is asporogenous in the absence of ATc, and that ATc 
can be used to drive faster and more efficient sporulation. Induction of Spo0A 
is titratable and this can be used in the study of the spo0A regulon both in 
vitro and in vivo, as demonstrated using a mouse model of C. difficile infection 
(CDI). Insights into differences between the sporulation pathways in B. subtilis 
and C. difficile gained by study of the inducible strain are discussed, further 
highlighting the universal interest of this tool. The Ptet-spo0A strain provides 
a useful background in which to generate mutations in genes involved in 
sporulation, therefore providing an exciting new tool to unravel key aspects of 
sporulation in C. difficile.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01793
PMCID: PMC5613124
PMID: 28983286


208. Front Microbiol. 2017 Jul 25;8:1411. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01411. eCollection 
2017.

Immunization with Recombinant TcdB-Encapsulated Nanocomplex Induces Protection 
against Clostridium difficile Challenge in a Mouse Model.

Liu YW(1), Chen YH(2), Chen JW(1)(3), Tsai PJ(3)(4), Huang IH(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, National 
Cheng Kung UniversityTainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, 
National Cheng Kung UniversityTainan, Taiwan.
(3)Center of Infectious Disease and Signaling Research, National Cheng Kung 
UniversityTainan, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung UniversityTainan, Taiwan.

Clostridium difficile is considered to be one of the major cause of infectious 
diarrhea in healthcare systems worldwide. Symptoms of C. difficile infection are 
caused largely by the production of two cytotoxins: toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B 
(TcdB). Vaccine development is considered desirable as it would decrease the 
mounting medical costs and mortality associated with C. difficile infections. 
Biodegradable nanoparticles composed of poly-γ-glutamic acid (γ-PGA) and 
chitosan have proven to be a safe and effective antigen delivery system for many 
viral vaccines. However, few studies have used this efficient antigen carrier 
for bacterial vaccine development. In this study, we eliminated the toxin 
activity domain of toxin B by constructing a recombinant protein rTcdB consists 
of residues 1852-2363 of TcdB receptor binding domain. The rTcdB was 
encapsulated in nanoparticles composed of γ-PGA and chitosan. Three rounds of 
intraperitoneal vaccination led to high anti-TcdB antibody responses and 
afforded mice full protection mice from lethal dose of C. difficile spore 
challenge. Protection was associated with high levels of toxin-neutralizing 
antibodies, and the rTcdB-encapsulated NPs elicited a longer-lasting antibody 
titers than antigen with the conventional adjuvant, aluminum hydroxide. 
Significant reductions in the level of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines 
were observed in vaccinated mouse. These results suggested that polymeric 
nanocomplex-based vaccine design can be useful in developing vaccine against C. 
difficile infections.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.01411
PMCID: PMC5525027
PMID: 28790999


209. PLoS One. 2016 Jun 28;11(6):e0158204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158204. 
eCollection 2016.

Deciphering Adaptation Strategies of the Epidemic Clostridium difficile 027 
Strain during Infection through In Vivo Transcriptional Analysis.

Kansau I(1), Barketi-Klai A(1), Monot M(2), Hoys S(1), Dupuy B(2), Janoir C(1), 
Collignon A(1).

Author information:
(1)EA4043 Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Univ. Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, 92296, Châtenay-Malabry Cedex, France.
(2)Laboratoire Pathogenèse des Bactéries Anaérobies, Institut Pasteur, 25-28, 
rue du Docteur Roux, 75015, Paris, France.

Clostridium difficile is responsible for a wide spectrum of infection from 
asymptomatic carriage to severe, relapsing colitis. Since 2003, C. difficile 
infections have increased with a higher morbidity and mortality due to the 
emergence of epidemic and hypervirulent C. difficile strains such as those of 
the epidemic lineage 027/BI/NAP1. To decipher the hypervirulence and epidemicity 
of 027 strains, we analyzed gene expression profiles of the R20291 027 strain 
using a monoxenic mouse model during the first 38h of infection. A total of 741 
genes were differentially expressed during the course of infection. They are 
mainly distributed in functional categories involved in host adaptation. Several 
genes of PTS and ABC transporters were significantly regulated during the 
infection, underlying the ability of strain R20291 to adapt its metabolism 
according to nutrient availability in the digestive tract. In this animal model, 
despite the early sporulation process, sporulation efficiency seems to indicate 
that growth of R20291 vegetative cells versus spores were favored during 
infection. The bacterial mechanisms associated to adaptability and flexibility 
within the gut environment, in addition to the virulence factor expression and 
antibiotic resistance, should contribute to the epidemicity and hypervirulence 
of the C. difficile 027 strains.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0158204
PMCID: PMC4924792
PMID: 27351947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


210. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Oct 23;11(10):e1005239. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005239. 
eCollection 2015 Oct.

Identification of a Novel Lipoprotein Regulator of Clostridium difficile Spore 
Germination.

Fimlaid KA(1), Jensen O(2), Donnelly ML(2), Francis MB(3), Sorg JA(3), Shen 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, Vermont, United States of America; Program in Cellular, Molecular & 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont, United States 
of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, Vermont, United States of America.
(3)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United 
States of America.

Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive spore-forming pathogen and a leading 
cause of nosocomial diarrhea. C. difficile infections are transmitted when 
ingested spores germinate in the gastrointestinal tract and transform into 
vegetative cells. Germination begins when the germinant receptor CspC detects 
bile salts in the gut. CspC is a subtilisin-like serine pseudoprotease that 
activates the related CspB serine protease through an unknown mechanism. 
Activated CspB cleaves the pro-SleC zymogen, which allows the activated SleC 
cortex hydrolase to degrade the protective cortex layer. While these regulators 
are essential for C. difficile spores to outgrow and form toxin-secreting 
vegetative cells, the mechanisms controlling their function have only been 
partially characterized. In this study, we identify the lipoprotein GerS as a 
novel regulator of C. difficile spore germination using targeted mutagenesis. A 
gerS mutant has a severe germination defect and fails to degrade cortex even 
though it processes SleC at wildtype levels. Using complementation analyses, we 
demonstrate that GerS secretion, but not lipidation, is necessary for GerS to 
activate SleC. Importantly, loss of GerS attenuates the virulence of C. 
difficile in a hamster model of infection. Since GerS appears to be conserved 
exclusively in related Peptostreptococcaeace family members, our results 
contribute to a growing body of work indicating that C. difficile has evolved 
distinct mechanisms for controlling the exit from dormancy relative to B. 
subtilis and other spore-forming organisms.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005239
PMCID: PMC4619724
PMID: 26496694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


211. Front Microbiol. 2017 Oct 25;8:2086. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02086. eCollection 
2017.

Biofilm Structures in a Mono-Associated Mouse Model of Clostridium difficile 
Infection.

Soavelomandroso AP(1), Gaudin F(2), Hoys S(1), Nicolas V(3), Vedantam G(4), 
Janoir C(1), Bouttier S(1).

Author information:
(1)EA4043, Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Univ. Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(2)Institut Paris Saclay d'Innovation Thérapeutique (IPSIT), UMS IPSIT 
Université Paris-Sud - US 31 INSERM - UMS 3679 CNRS, Plateforme d'Histologie 
souris Immunopathologie de Clamart - PHIC, Clamart, France.
(3)Institut Paris Saclay d'Innovation Thérapeutique (IPSIT), UMS IPSIT 
Université Paris-Sud - US 31 INSERM - UMS 3679 CNRS, Plateforme d'Imagerie 
cellulaire - MIPSIT, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(4)School of Animal and Comparative Biomedical Sciences, University of Arizona, 
Tucson, AZ, United States.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major healthcare-associated disease 
with high recurrence rates. Host colonization is critical for the infectious 
process, both in first episodes and in recurrent disease, with biofilm formation 
playing a key role. The ability of C. difficile to form a biofilm on abiotic 
surfaces is established, but has not yet been confirmed in the intestinal tract. 
Here, four different isolates of C. difficile, which are in vitro biofilm 
producers, were studied for their ability to colonize germ-free mice. The level 
of colonization achieved was similar for all isolates in the different parts of 
the murine gastrointestinal tract, but pathogen burden was higher in the cecum 
and colon. Confocal laser scanning microscopy revealed that C. difficile 
bacteria were distributed heterogeneously over the intestinal tissue, without 
contact with epithelial cells. The R20291 strain, which belongs to the Ribotype 
027 lineage, displayed a unique behavior compared to the other strains by 
forming numerous aggregates. By immunochemistry analyses, we showed that 
bacteria were localized inside and outside the mucus layer, irrespective of the 
strains tested. Most bacteria were entrapped in 3-D structures overlaying the 
mucus layer. For the R20291 strain, the cell-wall associated polysaccharide 
PS-II was detected in large amounts in the 3-D structure. As this component has 
been detected in the extrapolymeric matrix of in vitro C. difficile biofilms, 
our data suggest strongly that at least the R20291 strain is organized in the 
mono-associated mouse model in glycan-rich biofilm architecture, which 
sustainably maintains bacteria outside the mucus layer.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02086
PMCID: PMC5661025
PMID: 29118745


212. Vet J. 2015 Dec;206(3):349-55. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2015.09.001. Epub 2015 Sep 8.

Investigation of Clostridium difficile interspecies relatedness using multilocus 
sequence typing, multilocus variable-number tandem-repeat analysis and 
antimicrobial susceptibility testing.

Rodriguez C(1), Avesani V(2), Taminiau B(3), Van Broeck J(2), Brévers B(3), 
Delmée M(2), Daube G(3).

Author information:
(1)Food Science Department, FARAH, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Liège, Boulevard de Colonster 20, 4100 Liège, Belgium. Electronic address: 
c.rodriguez@ulg.ac.be.
(2)Microbiology Unit, Catholic University of Louvain, Avenue Hippocrate 
B1.54.01, 1200 Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Food Science Department, FARAH, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Liège, Boulevard de Colonster 20, 4100 Liège, Belgium.

Multilocus sequence typing (MLST), multilocus variable-number tandem-repeat 
analysis (MLVA) and antimicrobial susceptibility were performed on 37 animal and 
human C. difficile isolates belonging to 15 different PCR-ribotypes in order to 
investigate the relatedness of human and animal isolates and to identify 
possible transmission routes. MLVA identified a total of 21 different types 
while MLST only distinguished 12 types. Identical C. difficile strains were 
detected in the same animal species for PCR-ribotypes 014, 078, UCL 16U and UCL 
36, irrespective of their origin or the isolation date. Non clonal strains were 
found among different hosts; however, a high genetic association between pig and 
cattle isolates belonging to PCR-ribotype 078 was revealed. MLVA also showed 
genetic differences that clearly distinguished human from animal strains. For a 
given PCR-ribotype, human and animal strains presented a similar susceptibility 
to the antimicrobials tested. All strains were susceptible to vancomycin, 
metronidazole, chloramphenicol and rifampicin, while PCR-ribotypes 078, UCL 5a, 
UCL 36 and UCL 103 were associated with erythromycin resistance. The data 
suggest a wide dissemination of clones at hospitals and breeding-farms or a 
contamination at the slaughterhouse, but less probability of interspecies 
transmission. However, further highly discriminatory genotyping methods are 
necessary to elucidate interspecies and zoonotic transmission of C. difficile.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2015.09.001
PMID: 26545846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Jul;59(7):3726-35. doi: 10.1128/AAC.04794-14. 
Epub 2015 Mar 30.

Berberine blocks the relapse of Clostridium difficile infection in C57BL/6 mice 
after standard vancomycin treatment.

Lv Z(1), Peng G(2), Liu W(3), Xu H(4), Su J(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Laboratory Center, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Clinical Laboratory, Beijing Gong An Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(4)Animal Center, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(5)Clinical Laboratory Center, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China friendshiplab@sina.com.

Vancomycin is a preferred antibiotic for treating Clostridium difficile 
infection (CDI) and has been associated with a rate of recurrence of CDI of as 
high as 20% in treated patients. Recent studies have suggested that berberine, 
an alternative medical therapy for gastroenteritis and diarrhea, exhibits 
several beneficial effects, including induction of anti-inflammatory responses 
and restoration of the intestinal barrier function. This study investigated the 
therapeutic effects of berberine on preventing CDI relapse and restoring the gut 
microbiota in a mouse model. Berberine was administered through gavage to 
C57BL/6 mice with established CDI-induced intestinal injury and colitis. The 
disease activity index (DAI), mean relative weight, histopathology scores, and 
levels of toxins A and B in fecal samples were measured. An Illumina 
sequencing-based analysis of 16S rRNA genes was used to determine the overall 
structural change in the microbiota in the mouse ileocecum. Berberine 
administration significantly promoted the restoration of the intestinal 
microbiota by inhibiting the expansion of members of the family 
Enterobacteriaceae and counteracting the side effects of vancomycin treatment. 
Therapy consisting of vancomycin and berberine combined prevented weight loss, 
improved the DAI and the histopathology scores, and effectively decreased the 
mortality rate. Berberine prevented CDIs from relapsing and significantly 
improved survival in the mouse model of CDI. Our data indicate that a 
combination of berberine and vancomycin is more effective than vancomycin alone 
for treating CDI. One of the possible mechanisms by which berberine prevents a 
CDI relapse is through modulation of the gut microbiota. Although this 
conclusion was generated in the case of the mouse model, use of the combination 
of vancomycin and berberine and represent a novel therapeutic approach targeting 
CDI.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04794-14
PMCID: PMC4468740
PMID: 25824219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Immunology. 2013 Sep;140(1):111-22. doi: 10.1111/imm.12122.

Acute infection of mice with Clostridium difficile leads to eIF2α 
phosphorylation and pro-survival signalling as part of the mucosal inflammatory 
response.

Sadighi Akha AA(1), Theriot CM, Erb-Downward JR, McDermott AJ, Falkowski NR, 
Tyra HM, Rutkowski DT, Young VB, Huffnagle GB.

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5642, USA.

The current study sought to delineate the gene expression profile of the host 
response in the caecum and colon during acute infection with Clostridium 
difficile in a mouse model of infection, and to investigate the nature of the 
unfolded protein response in this process. The infected mice displayed a 
significant up-regulation in the expression of chemokines (Cxcl1, Cxcl2 and 
Ccl2), numerous pro-inflammatory cytokines (Ifng, Il1b, Il6, and Il17f), as well 
as Il22 and a number of anti-microbial peptides (Defa1, Defa28, Defb1, Slpi and 
Reg3g) at the site(s) of infection. This was accompanied by a significant influx 
of neutrophils, dendritic cells, cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage and 
all major subsets of lymphocytes to these site(s). However, CD4 T cells of the 
untreated and C. difficile-infected mice expressed similar levels of CD69 and 
CD25. Neither tissue had up-regulated levels of Tbx21, Gata3 or Rorc. The caeca 
and colons of the infected mice showed a significant increase in eukaryotic 
initiation factor 2α (eIF2α) phosphorylation, but neither the splicing of Xbp1 
nor the up-regulation of endoplasmic reticulum chaperones, casting doubt on the 
full-fledged induction of the unfolded protein response by C. difficile. They 
also displayed significantly higher phosphorylation of AKT and signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), an indication of pro-survival 
signalling. These data underscore the local, innate, pro-inflammatory nature of 
the response to C. difficile and highlight eIF2α phosphorylation and the 
interleukin-22-pSTAT3-RegIIIγ axis as two of the pathways that could be used to 
contain and counteract the damage inflicted on the intestinal epithelium.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imm.12122
PMCID: PMC3809711
PMID: 23668260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Vet Microbiol. 2012 Oct 12;159(3-4):364-70. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.04.006. 
Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Longitudinal study of Clostridium difficile and antimicrobial susceptibility of 
Escherichia coli in healthy horses in a community setting.

Schoster A(1), Staempfli HR, Arroyo LG, Reid-Smith RJ, Janecko N, Shewen PE, 
Weese JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, N1G2W1 ON, Canada. aschoster@life.ku.dk

Point prevalence studies have reported carriage rates of enteric pathogens in 
healthy horses, but longitudinal data are lacking. Commensal E. coli is an 
indicator organism to evaluate antimicrobial resistance of enteric bacteria, yet 
there are limited data for horses. The objectives of this study were to 
investigate and molecularly characterize isolates of Clostridium difficile, 
Clostridium perfringens and Salmonella, collected sequentially over a one year 
period, and to determine the antibiotic susceptibility profile for E. coli. 
Fecal samples were collected monthly from 25 adult horses for one year. 
Selective cultures were performed for all above bacteria. C. difficile isolates 
were characterized via PCR toxin gene profiling and ribotyping. Broth 
microdilution was performed to assess antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of 
E. coli. Toxigenic Clostridium difficile was isolated from 15/275 (5.45%) 
samples from 10/25 (40%) horses. Four horses were positive at multiple sampling 
times but different ribotypes were found in three. Ribotypes included 078 (n=6), 
001 (n=6) and C (n=3). C. perfringens was not isolated, nor was Salmonella. E. 
coli was isolated from 232/300 (77%) fecal samples. Resistance to ≥ 1 and ≥ 3 
antimicrobials was present in 31/232 (13.4%) and 6/232 (2.6%) respectively. Only 
two horses shed the same strain of toxigenic C. difficile for more than one 
month, indicating that shedding is transient. The high number of ribotype 078 is 
consistent with recent emergence of this strain in the local horse population. 
The low prevalence of antibiotic resistance in commensal E. coli suggests that 
healthy horses are not likely a major reservoir of resistance for enteric 
bacteria.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2012.04.006
PMID: 22554764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2009;121(3-4):91-5. doi: 10.1007/s00508-008-1127-x.

Clostridium difficile: a new zoonotic agent?

Indra A(1), Lassnig H, Baliko N, Much P, Fiedler A, Huhulescu S, Allerberger F.

Author information:
(1)Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety, Institute of Medical Microbiology 
and Hygiene, National Reference Center for Clostridium difficile, Wien, Austria. 
Alexander.Indra@ages.at

Clostridium difficile is mainly considered a nosocomial pathogen associated with 
diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis in hospitalized patients. Austrian 
hospitals reported 2761 cases of C. difficile infection (including 277 lethal 
outcomes) in 2007, compared with 777 cases (including 54 lethal outcomes) in 
2003. The occurrence of community-acquired C. difficile infection is also 
increasingly reported. Recent studies have shown the occurrence of C. difficile 
in food and animals. The aim of the present study was to determine the 
occurrence of C. difficile in food and animals in Austria. Between March and 
July 2008, gut or fecal samples from 67 cows, 61 pigs and 59 broiler chickens 
were collected at Austrian abattoirs. Between February and April 2008 meat 
samples (51 beef [25 ground], 27 pork [17 ground] and 6 samples of chicken meat) 
were purchased at retail outlets. Of the 187 samples tested, eight yielded C. 
difficile: in cows 3/67 samples (4.5%) were positive, in pigs 2/61 (3.3%), in 
broiler chickens 3/59 (5%). Six of the eight isolates yielded toxigenic C. 
difficile (toxins A and B): 2/67 (3%) cow samples, 2/61 (3.3%) pig samples, 2/59 
(3.4%) chicken samples. Genes for the binary toxin were detected in one of the 
two pig isolates, a PCR ribotype 126 strain. None of the 84 meat samples yielded 
C. difficile. The results of this Austrian study suggest that animal reservoirs 
are possible sources, via food, of human C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00508-008-1127-x
PMID: 19280132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Front Microbiol. 2014 Oct 8;5:513. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00513. eCollection 
2014.

Genetic relatedness between Japanese and European isolates of Clostridium 
difficile originating from piglets and their risk associated with human health.

Usui M(1), Nanbu Y(1), Oka K(2), Takahashi M(3), Inamatsu T(4), Asai T(5), 
Kamiya S(6), Tamura Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Food Microbiology and Food Safety, Department of Health and 
Environmental Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno Gakuen University 
Hokkaido, Japan.
(2)Miyarisan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Miyarisan Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Kyorin University School of Medicine Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)The United Graduate School of Veterinary Sciences, Gifu University Gifu, 
Japan.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, Kyorin University School of Medicine 
Tokyo, Japan.

Clostridium difficile colonization in pig intestine has been a public health 
concern. We analyzed C. difficile prevalence among piglets in Japan to clarify 
their origin and extent of the associated risk by using molecular and 
microbiological methods for both swine and human clinical isolates and foreign 
isolates. C. difficile was isolated from 120 neonatal piglet fecal samples. 
Toxin gene profile, antimicrobial susceptibilities, PCR ribotype, and 
multiple-locus variable-number tandem-repeat analysis (MLVA) type of swine 
isolates were determined and compared with those of human clinical and foreign 
isolates. One-hundred C. difficile strains were isolated from 69 (57.5%) 
samples, and 61 isolates (61%) were toxin gene-positive. Some isolates were 
resistant to antimicrobials, contributing to antibiotic-associated diarrhea by 
C. difficile. These results suggest that C. difficile, prevalent among Japanese 
pigs, is a potential risk for antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Furthermore, PCR 
ribotype 078 (12 isolates), which has been linked to multiple outbreaks 
worldwide, was the third-most frequently isolated of the 14 PCR ribotypes 
identified. Moreover, MLVA revealed that all 12 PCR ribotype 078 isolates were 
genetically related to European PCR ribotype 078 strains found in both humans 
and pigs. To date, in Japan, many breeding pigs have been imported from European 
countries. The genetic relatedness of C. difficile isolates of Japanese swine 
origin to those of European origin suggests that they were introduced into Japan 
via imported pigs.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2014.00513
PMCID: PMC4189341
PMID: 25339943


218. Toxicon. 1991;29(6):543-67. doi: 10.1016/0041-0101(91)90050-2.

Clostridium difficile toxin A and its effects on cells.

Fiorentini C(1), Thelestam M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ultrastructures, Istituto Superiore di Sanitá, Rome, Italy.

Clostridium difficile toxin A in its native form is a high molecular weight 
(520-540 K) aggregate with five major biological activities. It is lethal, 
enterotoxic, cytotoxic and cytotonic, and induces hemagglutination of rabbit red 
blood cells. Possibly these activities are contained in separate components. A 
major subunit of c. 230-310 K has been defined but lower molecular weight 
components cannot be excluded. The major component has been cloned, and sequence 
analysis indicated a complicated pattern of repeating sequences in the 
C-terminal third of the molecule. This review deals mainly with the effects of 
toxin A on cultured cells. Most mammalian cells are sensitive to toxin A whose 
major effect is to stop cell division irreversibly. The toxin binds via its 
repeat sequences to a trisaccharide receptor expressed on rabbit red cells and 
on brush border membranes from hamster intestine. This receptor seems to be 
functional in the hemagglutination reaction and the enterotoxicity. Its role in 
the cytotoxic effect of the toxin is not clear, but no other receptor structure 
has as yet been identified. In order to exert its cytotoxic (antiproliferative) 
effect toxin A must first be internalized by endocytosis. Thus a latency period 
of at least 30 min after toxin binding to cells is consistently observed, and 
all cytotoxic effects can be prevented by blocking the endocytosis pathway. The 
first microscopically visible signs of cytotoxicity consist in retraction and 
rounding of intoxicated cells. In addition the nucleus becomes polarized to one 
side of the cell while other cell organelles are not significantly affected. 
These morphological changes seem to be the consequence of a cytoskeletal 
rearrangement, mainly involving some components of the microfilament system. 
Inhibition of macromolecular syntheses as well as permeabilization of the plasma 
membrane may follow the early cytoskeletal effects and finally lead to cell 
death. Attempts to identify metabolic pathways of significance in the 
cytotoxicity suggest that the cytosolic level of Ca2+ is not important, thus 
excluding certain mechanisms for cell killing. In this respect the cytotoxic 
mode of action of toxin A clearly differs from that of toxin B. However, the 
biochemical basis for the antiproliferative effect of toxin A remains unknown.

DOI: 10.1016/0041-0101(91)90050-2
PMID: 1926159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1996 Feb;40(2):373-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.40.2.373.

Anti-Clostridium difficile bovine immunoglobulin concentrate inhibits 
cytotoxicity and enterotoxicity of C. difficile toxins.

Kelly CP(1), Pothoulakis C, Vavva F, Castagliuolo I, Bostwick EF, O'Keane JC, 
Keates S, LaMont JT.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Evans Memorial Department of Clinical Research, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

Clostridium difficile diarrhea and colitis result from the actions of bacterial 
exotoxins on the colonic mucosa. This study examined the ability of hyperimmune 
bovine colostral antibodies to neutralize the biological effects of these 
toxins. Anti-C. difficile bovine immunoglobulin concentrate was prepared from 
the colostral milk of Holstein cows previously immunized with C. difficile 
toxoids. The anti-C. difficile bovine immunoglobulin concentrate contained high 
levels of bovine immunoglobulin G specific for C. difficile toxins A and B, as 
evaluated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Anti-C. difficile bovine 
immunoglobulin concentrate neutralized the cytotoxic effects of purified toxin A 
and toxin B on cultured human fibroblasts, whereas control bovine immunoglobulin 
concentrate had little toxin-neutralizing activity. Anti-C. difficile bovine 
immunoglobulin concentrate also blocked the binding of toxin A to its enterocyte 
receptor and inhibited the enterotoxic effects of C. difficile toxins on the rat 
ileum, as measured by an increased rat ileal loop weight/length ratio (63% 
inhibition; P < 0.01), increased mannitol permeability (92% inhibition; P < 
0.01), and histologic grading of enteritis (P < 0.01 versus nonimmune bovine 
immunoglobulin concentrate). Thus, anti-C. difficile bovine immunoglobulin 
concentrate neutralizes the cytotoxic effects of C. difficile toxins in vitro 
and inhibits their enterotoxic effects in vivo. This agent may be clinically 
useful in the prevention and treatment of C. difficile diarrhea and colitis.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.40.2.373
PMCID: PMC163119
PMID: 8834883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2016;2016:3759819. doi: 
10.1155/2016/3759819. Epub 2016 Nov 24.

Traditional Chinese Medicine QPYF as Preventive Treatment for Clostridium 
difficile Associated Diarrhea in a Mouse Model.

Ya-Nan G(1), Jun W(1), Hao-Jun Z(2), Hong-Bing J(3), Ping L(2), Xin-Zhu L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)Clinical Research Institute, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, 
China.

Traditional Chinese medicine QPYF has a good effect for treating 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea in clinical practice. The aim of this study is to 
test its efficacy to prevent Clostridium difficile associated diarrhea (CDAD) in 
a mouse model. C57BL/6 mice were infected with Clostridium difficile VPI 10463 
after exposure to antimicrobial mixture. QPYF was administered from 7 days prior 
to Clostridium difficile infection to 20 days after infection, and its effect 
was compared with no treatment and receiving placebo. The mice were monitored 
for 20 days and the percent survival, disease activity index, weight loss, colon 
histopathology, and the levels of toxins in the feces were measured. The 
expressions of TNF α, MCP-1, NF-κB p65, and phospho-NF-κB p65 in the colon were 
presented by immunohistochemistry. The survival rate of QPYF group (93.75%) was 
higher than that of model control group (65%). The mice treated with QPYF had a 
lower weight loss and disease activity index, compared to the mice with placebo. 
A significantly lower level of histopathology scores, toxins in the feces, and 
TNF α, MCP-1, NF-κB p65, and phospho-NF-κB p65 were detected for QPYF-treated 
mice. Traditional Chinese medicine QPYF showed a good preventive effect for CDAD 
in a mouse model.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/3759819
PMCID: PMC5143731
PMID: 27999606

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests.


221. Sci Transl Med. 2015 Sep 23;7(306):306ra148. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac9103. 
Epub 2015 Sep 23.

A small-molecule antivirulence agent for treating Clostridium difficile 
infection.

Bender KO(1), Garland M(1), Ferreyra JA(2), Hryckowian AJ(2), Child MA(1), Puri 
AW(1), Solow-Cordero DE(3), Higginbottom SK(2), Segal E(1), Banaei N(4), Shen 
A(5), Sonnenburg JL(2), Bogyo M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur 
Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-5324, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5124, USA.
(3)Stanford University High-Throughput Bioscience Center, 1291 Welch Road, 
Stanford, CA 94305-5174, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur 
Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-5324, USA. Division of Infectious Diseases and 
Geographic Medicine, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5107, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, VT 05405, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur 
Drive, Stanford, CA 94305-5324, USA. Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5124, USA. 
mbogyo@stanford.edu.

Comment in
    Trends Microbiol. 2015 Dec;23(12):746-8.
    Sci Transl Med. 2016 Dec 21;8(370):370tc2.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a worldwide health threat that is 
typically triggered by the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, which disrupt the 
natural gut microbiota and allow this Gram-positive anaerobic pathogen to 
thrive. The increased incidence and severity of disease coupled with decreased 
response, high recurrence rates, and emergence of multiple antibiotic-resistant 
strains have created an urgent need for new therapies. We describe 
pharmacological targeting of the cysteine protease domain (CPD) within the C. 
difficile major virulence factor toxin B (TcdB). Through a targeted screen with 
an activity-based probe for this protease domain, we identified a number of 
potent CPD inhibitors, including one bioactive compound, ebselen, which is 
currently in human clinical trials for a clinically unrelated indication. This 
drug showed activity against both major virulence factors, TcdA and TcdB, in 
biochemical and cell-based studies. Treatment in a mouse model of CDI that 
closely resembles the human infection confirmed a therapeutic benefit in the 
form of reduced disease pathology in host tissues that correlated with 
inhibition of the release of the toxic glucosyltransferase domain (GTD). Our 
results show that this non-antibiotic drug can modulate the pathology of disease 
and therefore could potentially be developed as a therapeutic for the treatment 
of CDI.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aac9103
PMCID: PMC6025901
PMID: 26400909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The other authors declare 
that they have no competing interests.


222. J Med Microbiol. 1990 Mar;31(3):169-74. doi: 10.1099/00222615-31-3-169.

Hydrolytic enzyme production by Clostridium difficile and its relationship to 
toxin production and virulence in the hamster model.

Seddon SV(1), Hemingway I, Borriello SP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Communicable Diseases, MRC Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, 
Middlesex.

Thirty isolates of Clostridium difficile expressing different degrees of 
toxigenicity and virulence in an animal model were assayed for the production of 
chondroitin-4-sulphatase, hyaluronidase, heparinase, collagenase and protease. 
All strains demonstrated some hydrolytic enzyme activity. There was no direct 
correlation between toxigenic status, or virulence, and hydrolytic enzyme 
production. However, all five strains known to be highly virulent in the hamster 
model had hyaluronidase, chondroitin-4-sulphatase and collagenase activity 
whereas only three of five toxigenic but poorly virulent strains had these 
activities, the collagenase activity being weak in all three cases. The only two 
proteolytic strains are also highly virulent. The potential tissue damaging 
properties of these hydrolytic enzymes may help to explain the differences in 
virulence of C. difficile strains seen in the Syrian hamster model of 
antibiotic-associated colitis, and may contribute to the spectrum of disease 
seen in man. It is also possible that chondroitin-4-sulphatase, hyaluronidase 
and collagenase activity may release essential nutrients, promoting 
establishment of C. difficile in the gut.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-31-3-169
PMID: 2156075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Emerg Nurs. 2017 Nov;43(6):519-525. doi: 10.1016/j.jen.2017.02.003. Epub 2017 
Apr 4.

Kick the Bucket: One Hospital System's Journey to Reduce Clostridium Difficile.

Delaney MB(1).

Author information:
(1)Minneapolis, MN. Electronic address: mdelane2@fairview.org.

PROBLEM: Albert Einstein defines insanity as doing the same thing over again but 
expecting different results. Although the United States claims to reduce 
antibiotic abuse, practice strict isolation, and clean meticulously, the burden 
of Clostridium difficile outpaces goals. Unless innovative approaches are tried, 
we risk culling elderly, immunosuppressed, and otherwise debilitated 
populations. Emergency departments are a primary access point for patients who 
are unable to wait for primary care. As a result, many patients with diarrhea 
are seen in emergency departments.
METHODS: This article describes one hospital system's quality improvement trial 
of disposable commode pails (DCPs) for high-acuity patients in 3 of 5 
institutions. The rationale was to prevent staff from touching surfaces heavily 
contaminated with C difficile. Staff members were not to wash or reuse commode 
buckets between patients. Instead, DCPs were substituted, and only the commode 
chairs were wiped. For quantitative date, C difficile infections (CDIs) were 
compared across hospitals. Staff members were surveyed for qualitative data.
RESULTS: According to Survey Monkey, the rate of employee satisfaction with the 
new process was 95%. Fewer sewage backups resulted because nonbiodegradable 
wipes were disposed inside DCPs rather than in toilets or hoppers. 
Implementation and product costs were justified through labor savings and a 
reduced incidence of CDIs. CDI improvements were noted in system hospital 
emergency departments that used DCPs. Moreover, in one hospital that used DCPs 
in all nursing units for 1 year, CDI rates were reduced by 32%.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE: Third-party hospital laboratories generated all CDI 
data, which reduced bias. However, laboratories were unable to stratify CDIs as 
inpatient and outpatient in origin. More research is recommended with larger ED 
patient sample sizes.

Copyright © 2017 Emergency Nurses Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jen.2017.02.003
PMID: 28385299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Infect Immun. 2015 Nov 16;84(2):395-406. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00870-15. Print 2016 
Feb.

Neutralization of Clostridium difficile Toxin B Mediated by Engineered 
Lactobacilli That Produce Single-Domain Antibodies.

Andersen KK(1), Strokappe NM(2), Hultberg A(2), Truusalu K(3), Smidt I(3), 
Mikelsaar RH(3), Mikelsaar M(3), Verrips T(2), Hammarström L(1), Marcotte H(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Cellular Architecture and Dynamics, Department of Biology, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Division of Clinical Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden 
Harold.Marcotte@ki.se.

Clostridium difficile is the primary cause of nosocomial antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea in the Western world. The major virulence factors of C. difficile are 
two exotoxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), which cause extensive colonic 
inflammation and epithelial damage manifested by episodes of diarrhea. In this 
study, we explored the basis for an oral antitoxin strategy based on engineered 
Lactobacillus strains expressing TcdB-neutralizing antibody fragments in the 
gastrointestinal tract. Variable domain of heavy chain-only (VHH) antibodies 
were raised in llamas by immunization with the complete TcdB toxin. Four unique 
VHH fragments neutralizing TcdB in vitro were isolated. When these VHH fragments 
were expressed in either secreted or cell wall-anchored form in Lactobacillus 
paracasei BL23, they were able to neutralize the cytotoxic effect of the toxin 
in an in vitro cell-based assay. Prophylactic treatment with a combination of 
two strains of engineered L. paracasei BL23 expressing two neutralizing 
anti-TcdB VHH fragments (VHH-B2 and VHH-G3) delayed killing in a hamster 
protection model where the animals were challenged with spores of a TcdA(-) 
TcdB(+) strain of C. difficile (P < 0.05). Half of the hamsters in the treated 
group survived until the termination of the experiment at day 5 and showed 
either no damage or limited inflammation of the colonic mucosa despite having 
been colonized with C. difficile for up to 4 days. The protective effect in the 
hamster model suggests that the strategy could be explored as a supplement to 
existing therapies for patients.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00870-15
PMCID: PMC4730582
PMID: 26573738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Infect Dis. 2016 Jul 1;214(1):130-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiw071. Epub 2016 Feb 
24.

Vancomycin Treatment Alters Humoral Immunity and Intestinal Microbiota in an 
Aged Mouse Model of Clostridium difficile Infection.

van Opstal E(1), Kolling GL(2), Moore JH 2nd(2), Coquery CM(3), Wade NS(3), Loo 
WM(3), Bolick DT(2), Shin JH(2), Erickson LD(3), Warren CA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(2)Department of Medicine.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Cancer Biology Beirne B. Carter 
Center for Immunology Research, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.

BACKGROUND: The elderly host is highly susceptible to severe disease and 
treatment failure in Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). We investigated how 
treatment with vancomycin in the aged host influences systemic and intestinal 
humoral responses and select intestinal microbiota.
METHODS: Young (age, 2 months) and aged (age, 18 months) C57BL/6 mice were 
infected with VPI 10463 after exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics. Vancomycin 
was given 24 hours after infection, and treatment was continued for 5 days. At 
select time points, specimens of serum and intestinal tissue and contents were 
collected for histopathologic analysis, to measure antibody levels and the 
pathogen burden, and to determine the presence and levels of select intestinal 
microbiota and C. difficile toxin.
RESULTS: Levels of disease severity, relapse, and mortality were increased, and 
recovery from infection was slower in aged mice compared to young mice. Serum 
levels of immunoglobulin M, immunoglobulin A, and immunoglobulin G against C. 
difficile toxin A were depressed in aged mice, and vancomycin treatment reduced 
antibody responses in both age groups. While baseline levels of total bacterial 
load, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Enterobacteriaceae were mostly similar, 
aged mice had a significant change in the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio with 
vancomycin treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Vancomycin treatment decreases the systemic humoral response to 
CDI. Increased mortality from and recurrence of CDI in the aged host are 
associated with an impaired humoral response and a greater susceptibility to 
vancomycin-induced alteration of intestinal microbiota.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiw071
PMCID: PMC4907406
PMID: 26917573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Pathog Dis. 2015 Apr;73(3):ftv008. doi: 10.1093/femspd/ftv008. Epub 2015 Jan 27.

Clostridium difficile toxin B intoxicated mouse colonic epithelial CT26 cells 
stimulate the activation of dendritic cells.

Huang T(1), Perez-Cordon G(2), Shi L(2), Li G(3), Sun X(4), Wang X(5), Wang 
J(3), Feng H(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology 
(SCUT), Guangzhou 51006, China Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University 
of Maryland Dental School, Baltimore, MD 21021, USA.
(2)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University of Maryland Dental School, 
Baltimore, MD 21021, USA.
(3)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of Technology 
(SCUT), Guangzhou 51006, China.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease and Global Health, Tufts Cummings School of 
Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA 01536, USA.
(5)Institute of Life Science, General Hospital of the People's Liberation Army, 
Beijing 100853, China.
(6)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University of Maryland Dental School, 
Baltimore, MD 21021, USA hfeng@umaryland.edu.

Clostridium difficile causes antibiotic-associated diarrhea and pseudomembranous 
colitis mainly through two exotoxins TcdA and TcdB that target intestinal 
epithelial cells. Dendritic cells (DCs) play an important role in regulating 
intestinal inflammatory responses. In the current study, we explored the 
interaction of TcdB-intoxicated epithelial cells with mouse bone marrow-derived 
DCs. TcdB induced cell death and heat shock protein translocation in mouse 
intestinal epithelial CT26 cells. The intoxicated epithelial cells promoted the 
phagocytosis and the TNF-α secretion by DCs. Incubation with TcdB-intoxicated 
CT26 cells stimulated DC maturation. Moreover, TcdB-treated CT26 cells induced 
DC immigration when they were injected into mice subcutaneously. Taken together, 
these data demonstrate that TcdB-intoxicated intestinal epithelial cells are 
able to stimulate DC activation in vitro and attract DCs in vivo, indicating 
that epithelial cells may be able to regulate DC activation under the exposure 
of TcdB during C. difficile infection.

© FEMS 2015. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femspd/ftv008
PMCID: PMC4435672
PMID: 25743476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Microbiology (Reading). 2013 Jul;159(Pt 7):1254-1266. doi: 
10.1099/mic.0.066712-0. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

A novel approach to generate a recombinant toxoid vaccine against Clostridium 
difficile.

Donald RGK(1), Flint M(2), Kalyan N(1), Johnson E(1), Witko SE(1), Kotash C(1), 
Zhao P(1), Megati S(1), Yurgelonis I(1), Lee PK(1), Matsuka YV(1), Severina 
E(1), Deatly A(1), Sidhu M(1), Jansen KU(1), Minton NP(3), Anderson AS(1).

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Vaccine Research, Pearl River, NY 10654, USA.
(2)Centers for Disease Control, 1600 Clifton Rd, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.
(3)Clostridia Research Group, NIHR Biomedical Research Unit in GI Disease, 
University Park, University of Nottingham, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.

The Clostridium difficile toxins A and B are primarily responsible for symptoms 
of C. difficile associated disease and are prime targets for vaccine 
development. We describe a plasmid-based system for the production of 
genetically modified toxins in a non-sporulating strain of C. difficile that 
lacks the toxin genes tcdA and tcdB. TcdA and TcdB mutations targeting 
established glucosyltransferase cytotoxicity determinants were introduced into 
recombinant plasmids and episomally expressed toxin mutants purified from C. 
difficile transformants. TcdA and TcdB mutants lacking glucosyltransferase and 
autoproteolytic processing activities were ~10 000-fold less toxic to cultured 
human IMR-90 cells than corresponding recombinant or native toxins. However, 
both mutants retained residual cytotoxicity that could be prevented by 
preincubating the antigens with specific antibodies or by formalin treatment. 
Such non-toxic formalin-treated mutant antigens were immunogenic and protective 
in a hamster model of infection. The remaining toxicity of untreated TcdA and 
TcdB mutant antigens was associated with cellular swelling, a phenotype 
consistent with pore-induced membrane leakage. TcdB substitution mutations 
previously shown to block vesicular pore formation and toxin translocation 
substantially reduced residual toxicity. We discuss the implications of these 
results for the development of a C. difficile toxoid vaccine.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.066712-0
PMCID: PMC3749728
PMID: 23629868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Dig Dis Sci. 2008 Apr;53(4):990-6. doi: 10.1007/s10620-007-9957-3. Epub 2007 Sep 
1.

Fucoidin prevents Clostridium difficile toxin-A-induced ileal enteritis in mice.

Barreto AR(1), Cavalcante IC, Castro MV, Junqueira AF, Vale MR, Ribeiro RA, 
Souza MH, Brito GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Morphology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, 
Rua Delmiro de Farias, sn, Fortaleza, CE CEP 60.416-030, Brazil.

Recent reports suggest increased incidence and severity of Clostridium 
difficile-associated diseases. These facts have raised the need for additional 
clarification of pathogenesis and for a search for new therapeutic strategies. 
This study evaluated the effects of the polysaccharide fucoidin, an L-selectin 
blocker, on toxin-A-induced mouse enteritis. Fucoidin (25 mg/kg) or saline (0.1 
ml) were injected systemically (ocular plexus) 5 min prior to local challenge 
with toxin A (5 microg/ileal loop) or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). 
Intestinal fluid volume/length and ileal loop weight/length ratios were 
calculated 3 h later. Ileal tissues were collected for histopathology and 
measurement of myeloperoxidase and adenosine deaminase activity. Fucoidin 
significantly (P < 0.05) prevented the toxin-A-induced increase in weight/length 
and volume/length ratios and reduced mucosal disruption, as shown in 
histopathology. Fucoidin also significantly (P < 0.05) reduced toxin-A-induced 
myeloperoxidase and adenosine deaminase activities. In conclusion, fucoidin 
reduces tissue injury and inflammation in toxin-A-induced mouse enteritis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-007-9957-3
PMID: 17805968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2008 Oct;62(4):762-5. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkn276. Epub 2008 
Jul 7.

In vitro susceptibility of genotypically distinct and clonal Clostridium 
difficile strains to oritavancin.

O'Connor R(1), Baines SD, Freeman J, Wilcox MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Clostridium difficile infection is a nosocomial disease of 
increasing importance. First-line treatment is limited to metronidazole or 
vancomycin. Oritavancin is a lipoglycopeptide with activity against 
Gram-positive bacteria, including drug-resistant pathogens. MICs of oritavancin, 
metronidazole and vancomycin for genotypically distinct C. difficile strains, 
including epidemic C. difficile PCR ribotypes 001 and 027, were determined by 
agar incorporation and broth macrodilution methods. In agar incorporation 
methods, the impact of supplements on oritavancin MICs was tested to address 
oritavancin binding to surfaces.
METHODS: Thirty-three genotypically distinct C. difficile strains were 
identified by PCR ribotyping. Wilkins Chalgren agar incorporation plates 
containing oritavancin, metronidazole and vancomycin were prepared with and 
without 0.002% polysorbate-80 (P80) and lysed horse blood (2%). Broth 
macrodilution MICs of oritavancin, metronidazole and vancomycin were determined 
in Brucella broth. Inoculated agar incorporation plates and broth macrodilution 
tubes were cultured anaerobically at 37 degrees C for 48 h.
RESULTS: Broth macrodilution MICs were lower than agar incorporation MICs for 
oritavancin, but not for metronidazole and vancomycin. Oritavancin broth 
macrodilution MIC(90)s were 2- to 4-fold lower than the corresponding agar 
incorporation MIC(90)s, while geometric mean MICs were >5-fold lower. 
Oritavancin broth macrodilution MIC(90)s were approximately 2- and 5-fold lower 
than those for metronidazole and vancomycin. Metronidazole was the most active 
antimicrobial agent against C. difficile using agar incorporation methods. 
Oritavancin agar incorporation MIC(90)s were unaffected by 0.002% P80 and/or 2% 
lysed horse blood.
CONCLUSIONS: Oritavancin was at least 4-fold more potent than vancomycin against 
the majority (25/33) of C. difficile strains tested by broth macrodilution. 
Oritavancin activity may be underestimated by agar incorporation methods, 
regardless of the use of P80 or lysed horse blood.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkn276
PMID: 18606787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2017 Apr 28;27(4):694-700. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1612.12012.

The American Cockroach Peptide Periplanetasin-2 Blocks Clostridium Difficile 
Toxin A-Induced Cell Damage and Inflammation in the Gut.

Hong J(1), Zhang P(1), Yoon IN(1), Hwang JS(2), Kang JK(3), Kim H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Life Science and Chemistry, College of Natural Science, Daejin 
University, Pocheon 11159, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Agricultural Biology, National Academy of Agricultural Science, 
RDA, Wanju 55365, Republic of Korea.
(3)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Incheon 21936, Republic of Korea.

Clostridium difficile, which causes pseudomembranous colitis, releases toxin A 
and toxin B. These toxins are considered to be the main causative agents for the 
disease pathogenesis, and their expression is associated with a marked increase 
of apoptosis in mucosal epithelial cells. Colonic epithelial cells are believed 
to form a physical barrier between the lumen and the submucosa, and abnormally 
increased mucosal epithelial cell apoptosis is considered to be an initial step 
in gut inflammation responses. Therefore, one approach to treating 
pseudomembranous colitis would be to develop agents that block the mucosal 
epithelial cell apoptosis caused by toxin A, thus restoring barrier function and 
curing inflammatory responses in the gut. We recently isolated an antimicrobial 
peptide, Periplanetasin-2 (Peri-2, YPCKLNLKLGKVPFH) from the American cockroach, 
whose extracts have shown great potential for clinical use. Here, we assessed 
whether Peri-2 could inhibit the cell toxicity and inflammation caused by C. 
difficile toxin A. Indeed, in human colonocyte HT29 cells, Peri-2 inhibited the 
toxin A-induced decrease in cell proliferation and ameliorated the cell 
apoptosis induced by this toxin. Moreover, in the toxin A-induced mouse 
enteritis model, Peri-2 blocked the mucosal disruption and inflammatory response 
caused by toxin A. These results suggest that the American cockroach peptide 
Peri-2 could be a possible drug candidate for addressing the pseudomembranous 
colitis caused by C. difficile toxin A.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1612.12012
PMID: 28173695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cell Chem Biol. 2019 Jan 17;26(1):17-26.e13. doi: 
10.1016/j.chembiol.2018.10.002. Epub 2018 Oct 25.

Small-Molecule Allosteric Triggers of Clostridium difficile Toxin B 
Auto-proteolysis as a Therapeutic Strategy.

Ivarsson ME(1), Durantie E(1), Huberli C(1), Huwiler S(1), Hegde C(2), Friedman 
J(2), Altamura F(2), Lu J(3), Verdu EF(3), Bercik P(3), Logan SM(4), Chen W(4), 
Leroux JC(1), Castagner B(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Chemistry and Applied 
Biosciences, ETH Zurich, Vladimir-Prelog-Weg 1-5/10, Zurich 8093, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Microbiome & Disease Tolerance 
Centre, McGill University, 3655 Prom. Sir-William-Osler, Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6, 
Canada.
(3)Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute, Department of Medicine, 
McMaster University, 1280 Main Street West, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(4)Human Health Therapeutics, National Research Council Canada, 100 Sussex 
Drive, Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6, Canada.
(5)Department of Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Microbiome & Disease Tolerance 
Centre, McGill University, 3655 Prom. Sir-William-Osler, Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6, 
Canada. Electronic address: bastien.castagner@mcgill.ca.

Comment in
    Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2019 Mar;40(3):155-156.

Clostridium difficile causes increasing numbers of life-threatening intestinal 
infections. Symptoms associated with C. difficile infection (CDI) are mediated 
by secreted protein toxins, whose virulence is modulated by intracellular 
auto-proteolysis following allosteric activation of their protease domains by 
inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6). Here, we explore the possibility of 
inactivating the C. difficile toxin B (TcdB) by triggering its auto-proteolysis 
in the gut lumen prior to cell uptake using gain-of-function small molecules. We 
anticipated that high calcium concentrations typically found in the gut would 
strongly chelate IP6, precluding it from pre-emptively inducing toxin 
auto-proteolysis if administered exogenously. We therefore designed IP6 analogs 
with reduced susceptibility to complexation by calcium, which maintained 
allosteric activity at physiological calcium concentrations. We found that oral 
administration of IP6 analogs attenuated inflammation and promoted survival in 
mouse models of CDI. Our data provide impetus to further develop small-molecule 
allosteric triggers of toxin auto-proteolysis as a therapeutic strategy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2018.10.002
PMID: 30482680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. PLoS Pathog. 2013 May;9(5):e1003356. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003356. Epub 
2013 May 9.

Bile acid recognition by the Clostridium difficile germinant receptor, CspC, is 
important for establishing infection.

Francis MB(1), Allen CA, Shrestha R, Sorg JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United 
States of America.

Clostridium difficile spores must germinate in vivo to become actively growing 
bacteria in order to produce the toxins that are necessary for disease. C. 
difficile spores germinate in vitro in response to certain bile acids and 
glycine. In other sporulating bacteria, proteins embedded within the inner 
membrane of the spore sense the presence of germinants and trigger the release 
of Ca⁺⁺-dipicolinic acid (Ca⁺⁺-DPA) from the spore core and subsequent 
hydrolysis of the spore cortex, a specialized peptidoglycan. Based upon homology 
searches of known germinant receptors from other spore-forming bacteria, C. 
difficile likely uses unique mechanisms to recognize germinants. Here, we 
identify the germination-specific protease, CspC, as the C. difficile bile acid 
germinant receptor and show that bile acid-mediated germination is important for 
establishing C. difficile disease in the hamster model of infection. These 
results highlight the importance of bile acids in triggering in vivo germination 
and provide the first description of a C. difficile spore germinant receptor. 
Blocking the interaction of bile acids with the C. difficile spore may represent 
an attractive target for novel therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003356
PMCID: PMC3649964
PMID: 23675301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


233. Clin Infect Dis. 2012 Aug;55 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):S110-5. doi: 10.1093/cid/cis390.

Safety analysis of fidaxomicin in comparison with oral vancomycin for 
Clostridium difficile infections.

Weiss K(1), Allgren RL, Sellers S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Maisonneuve-Rosemont 
Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
weisscan@aol.com

Fidaxomicin is a novel macrocyclic antibiotic recently approved by the US Food 
and Drug Administration for the treatment of Clostridium difficile-associated 
diarrhea in adults. We reviewed safety data from nonclinical studies and 
clinical trials (phases 1, 2A, and 3) with fidaxomicin. In nonclinical studies, 
fidaxomicin was administered orally at approximately 1 g/kg/d to dogs for up to 
3 months with no significant target-organ toxicities observed. A total of 728 
adults have received oral fidaxomicin in clinical trials to date: 116 healthy 
volunteers and 612 patients with C. difficile infection. In phase 3 clinical 
trials, fidaxomicin was well tolerated, with a safety profile comparable with 
oral vancomycin. There were no differences in the incidence of death or serious 
adverse events between the 2 drugs. Fidaxomicin appears to be well tolerated. 
Continued monitoring of adverse events in the postmarketing setting will provide 
additional information about the full safety profile of fidaxomicin.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/cis390
PMCID: PMC3388027
PMID: 22752858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e64121. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064121. Print 
2013.

Susceptibility of hamsters to Clostridium difficile isolates of differing 
toxinotype.

Buckley AM(1), Spencer J, Maclellan LM, Candlish D, Irvine JJ, Douce GR.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, Glasgow Biomedical 
Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.

Clostridium difficile is the most commonly associated cause of antibiotic 
associated disease (AAD), which caused ∼21,000 cases of AAD in 2011 in the U.K. 
alone. The golden Syrian hamster model of CDI is an acute model displaying many 
of the clinical features of C. difficile disease. Using this model we 
characterised three clinical strains of C. difficile, all differing in 
toxinotype; CD1342 (PaLoc negative), M68 (toxinotype VIII) & BI-7 (toxinotype 
III). The naturally occurring non-toxic strain colonised all hamsters within 
1-day post challenge (d.p.c.) with high-levels of spores being shed in the 
faeces of animals that appeared well throughout the entire experiment. However, 
some changes including increased neutrophil influx and unclotted red blood cells 
were observed at early time points despite the fact that the known C. difficile 
toxins (TcdA, TcdB and CDT) are absent from the genome. In contrast, hamsters 
challenged with strain M68 resulted in a 45% mortality rate, with those that 
survived challenge remaining highly colonised. It is currently unclear why some 
hamsters survive infection, as bacterial & toxin levels and histology scores 
were similar to those culled at a similar time-point. Hamsters challenged with 
strain BI-7 resulted in a rapid fatal infection in 100% of the hamsters 
approximately 26 hr post challenge. Severe caecal pathology, including 
transmural neutrophil infiltrates and extensive submucosal damage correlated 
with high levels of toxin measured in gut filtrates ex vivo. These data 
describes the infection kinetics and disease outcomes of 3 clinical C. difficile 
isolates differing in toxin carriage and provides additional insights to the 
role of each toxin in disease progression.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064121
PMCID: PMC3660315
PMID: 23704976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


235. Rev Infect Dis. 1985 Nov-Dec;7 Suppl 4:S579-93. doi: 
10.1093/clinids/7.supplement_4.s579.

Discovery and development of the monobactams.

Sykes RB, Bonner DP.

A novel procedure designed to detect naturally occurring beta-lactam-containing 
molecules led to isolation of the monobactams - structurally unique, bacterially 
produced, monocyclic beta-lactam antibiotics. Although none of these monobactams 
exhibited impressive antimicrobial activity, side-chain variation - as with the 
penicillins and cephalosporins - resulted in potently active compounds. 
Aztreonam was chosen from hundreds of compounds for extended laboratory studies. 
In addition to a unique chemical structure, aztreonam has biologic properties 
that are unique in comparison with those of the classical penicillins and 
cephalosporins. Aztreonam is relatively inactive against gram-positive bacteria 
and anaerobes but is extremely effective against aerobic gram-negative bacteria, 
including Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The drug is highly resistant to enzymatic 
hydrolysis by beta-lactamases, particularly those known to be mediated by R 
plasmids, and is a poor inducer of chromosomal beta-lactamases. In the majority 
of drug combinations tested, aztreonam exhibits additive or synergistic 
activity. In a series of animal-model infections, the drug showed a high degree 
of efficacy that was consistent with findings in studies in vitro. In a hamster 
model for Clostridium difficile-induced pseudomembranous colitis, aztreonam did 
not induce any significant changes.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/7.supplement_4.s579
PMID: 3909315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014;58(2):892-900. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01830-13. Epub 
2013 Nov 25.

In vitro and in vivo antibacterial evaluation of cadazolid, a new antibiotic for 
treatment of Clostridium difficile infections.

Locher HH(1), Seiler P, Chen X, Schroeder S, Pfaff P, Enderlin M, Klenk A, 
Fournier E, Hubschwerlen C, Ritz D, Kelly CP, Keck W.

Author information:
(1)Actelion Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Allschwil, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 58:901.

Clostridium difficile is a leading cause of health care-associated diarrhea with 
significant morbidity and mortality, and new options for the treatment of C. 
difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD) are needed. Cadazolid is a new 
oxazolidinone-type antibiotic that is currently in clinical development for 
treatment of CDAD. Here, we report the in vitro and in vivo antibacterial 
evaluation of cadazolid against C. difficile. Cadazolid showed potent in vitro 
activity against C. difficile with a MIC range of 0.125 to 0.5 μg/ml, including 
strains resistant to linezolid and fluoroquinolones. In time-kill kinetics 
experiments, cadazolid showed a bactericidal effect against C. difficile 
isolates, with >99.9% killing in 24 h, and was more bactericidal than 
vancomycin. In contrast to metronidazole and vancomycin, cadazolid strongly 
inhibited de novo toxin A and B formation in stationary-phase cultures of 
toxigenic C. difficile. Cadazolid also inhibited C. difficile spore formation 
substantially at growth-inhibitory concentrations. In the hamster and mouse 
models for CDAD, cadazolid was active, conferring full protection from diarrhea 
and death with a potency similar to that of vancomycin. These findings support 
further investigations of cadazolid for the treatment of CDAD.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01830-13
PMCID: PMC3910819
PMID: 24277020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Infect Immun. 1978 Nov;22(2):418-22. doi: 10.1128/IAI.22.2.418-422.1978.

Neutralization of Clostridium difficile toxin by Clostridium sordellii 
antitoxins.

Chang TW, Gorbach SL, Bartlett JB.

Neutralization of Clostridium difficile toxin by Clostridium sordellii antitoxin 
was studied by cytotoxicity assay in tissue culture. The sources of toxin were 
stools from two patients with pseudomembranous colitis and a culture filtrate of 
C. difficile isolated from one of the patients. C. sordellii antitoxin was 
available either in monovalent form or as gas gangrene polyvalent antitoxin. The 
potency of antitoxins against C. difficile determined by cytotoxicity assay did 
not correlate with the established values reported for mouse protection tests 
against C. sordellii toxin. An equivalent zone of optimal neutralization was 
demonstrated for stool toxin, and a slightly different one for culture toxin. 
The rate of neutralization appeared to be instantaneous, either at 24 or at 37 
degrees C. The efficacy of antitoxin in preventing cytotoxicity in cultured 
cells preexposed to toxin decreased rapidly with preexposure time. The union 
between toxin and antitoxin could be readily dissociated by simple dilution or 
by ammonium sulfate precipitation followed by dissociated by simple dilution or 
by ammonium sulfate precipitation followed by dilution. Continued incubation of 
toxin-antitoxin mixture did not increase the firmness of the union; on the 
contrary, more dissociation occurred. The unusual looseness of the 
toxin-antitoxin union is probably relatd to lack of serological specificity or 
affinity. Based on these observations, a practical diagnostic method for 
antibiotic-induced colitis is outlined.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.22.2.418-422.1978
PMCID: PMC422172
PMID: 730363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Vet Res. 2010 Oct;71(10):1189-94. doi: 10.2460/ajvr.71.10.1189.

Prevalence of antimicrobial resistance and association with toxin genes in 
Clostridium difficile in commercial swine.

Thakur S(1), Putnam M, Fry PR, Abley M, Gebreyes WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University Raleigh, NC 27606, USA. 
sthakur@ncsu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To estimate prevalence and determine association between antimicrobia 
resistance and toxin gene profile of Clostridium difficile in commercial pigs at 
the preharvest food-safety level.
ANIMALS: 68 sows and 251 young pigs from 5 farms in North Carolina and 3 in 
Ohio.
PROCEDURES: Fecal samples were collected from sows (8/farm) and matched young 
pigs (32/farm) at farrowing and again at the nursery and finishing stages. 
Clostridium difficile isolates were tested for susceptibility to 6 
antimicrobials. A PCR assay was used to detect genes coding for enterotoxin A 
(tcdA), cytotoxin B (tcdB), and binary toxin (cdtB).
RESULTS: C difficile prevalence in young pigs at farrowing was 73% (n=183) with 
significantly higher prevalence in Ohio (875%) than in North Carolina (64%). 
Clostridium difficile was isolated from 32 (47%) sows with no significant 
difference between the 2 regions. A single pig had a positive test result at the 
nursery, and no isolate was recovered at the finishing farms. Resistance to 
ciprofloxacin was predominant in young pigs (91.3% of isolates) and sows (94%). 
The antimicrobial resistance profile ciprofloxacin-erythromycin-tetracycline was 
detected in 21.4% and 11.7% of isolates from young pigs and sows, respectively. 
Most isolates had positive results for tcdA (65%), tcdB (84%), and the binary 
toxin cdtB (77%) genes. Erythromycin resistance and tetracycline resistance were 
significantly associated with toxin gene profiles.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The common occurrence of 
antimicrobial-resistant C difficile and the significant association of toxigenic 
strains with antimicrobial resistance could contribute to high morbidity in 
farms with farrowing pigs.

DOI: 10.2460/ajvr.71.10.1189
PMID: 20919905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Vet Diagn Invest. 1994 Jul;6(3):342-7. doi: 10.1177/104063879400600310.

Fecal shedding of Clostridium difficile in dogs: a period prevalence survey in a 
veterinary medical teaching hospital.

Struble AL(1), Tang YJ, Kass PH, Gumerlock PH, Madewell BR, Silva J Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Surgical and Radiological Sciences, School of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis 95616.

The goal of this study was to determine the fecal prevalence of Clostridium 
difficile in dogs who were patients at a veterinary medical teaching hospital. 
Stool specimens collected from 152 dogs (in- and outpatients) were analyzed for 
the presence of C. difficile. An additional 42 stool specimens were collected 
and examined from dogs recently housed at local animal shelters. Following 
culture on selective medium, C. difficile was identified by a latex 
agglutination test, and the presence of the toxin A and B genes was determined 
individually by polymerase chain reaction. Clostridium difficile was isolated 
from the feces of 28 of the veterinary hospital patients (18.4%); isolates from 
14 of these patients (50.0%) were toxigenic. Diarrhea was a clinical finding in 
5 (35.7%) of the dogs carrying toxigenic isolates of C. difficile, whereas 
diarrhea was noted in only 2 of 14 dogs (14.3%) shedding nontoxigenic isolates. 
Three of 14 dogs (21.4%) shedding toxigenic isolates of C. difficile were 
receiving antibiotics at the time of stool collection, whereas 5 of 14 dogs 
(37.5%) shedding nontoxigenic strains of C. difficile were receiving 
antibiotics. The carriage rate of C. difficile was significantly higher for 
animals categorized as inpatients of the veterinary hospital. The carriage rate 
also provided evidence for an increased risk for fecal shedding with increasing 
age. Clostridium difficile was not isolated from any of the 42 dogs recently 
housed at local animal shelters. This study confirms the presence of toxigenic 
C. difficile in dogs at a veterinary teaching hospital.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1177/104063879400600310
PMID: 7948204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Korean J Food Sci Anim Resour. 2017;37(3):368-375. doi: 
10.5851/kosfa.2017.37.3.368. Epub 2017 Jun 30.

Beneficial Effect of Bifidobacterium longum ATCC 15707 on Survival Rate of 
Clostridium difficile Infection in Mice.

Yun B(1), Song M(2), Park DJ(3), Oh S(4).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Safety Team, Agro-Food Safety & Crop Protection Department, 
National Institute of Agricultural Sciences, Rural Development Administration, 
Wanju 55365, Korea.
(2)Animal Products Research and Development Division, National Institute of 
Animal Science, RDA, Wanju 55365, Korea.
(3)Food Research Institute, Seongnam 13539, Korea.
(4)Division of Animal Science, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, 
Korea.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the main cause of hospital-acquired 
diarrhea that can cause colitis or even death. The medical-treatment cost and 
deaths caused by CDI are increasing annually worldwide. New approaches for 
prevention and treatment of these infections are needed, such as the use of 
probiotics. Probiotics, including Bifidobacterium spp. and Lactobacillus, are 
microorganisms that confer a health benefit to the host when administered in 
adequate amounts. The effect of Bifidobacterium longum ATCC 15707 on infectious 
disease caused by C. difficile 027 was investigated in a mouse model. The 
survival rates for mice given the pathogen alone, and with live cells, or dead 
cells of B. longum were 40, 70, and 60%, respectively. In addition, the 
intestinal tissues of the B. longum-treated group maintained structural 
integrity with some degree of damage. These findings suggested that B. longum 
ATCC 15707 has a function in repressing the infectious disease caused by C. 
difficile 027.

DOI: 10.5851/kosfa.2017.37.3.368
PMCID: PMC5516063
PMID: 28747822


241. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 29;10(4):e0124971. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124971. 
eCollection 2015.

The Clostridium difficile Protease Cwp84 Modulates both Biofilm Formation and 
Cell-Surface Properties.

Pantaléon V(1), Soavelomandroso AP(1), Bouttier S(1), Briandet R(2), Roxas B(3), 
Chu M(3), Collignon A(1), Janoir C(1), Vedantam G(4), Candela T(1).

Author information:
(1)EA4043, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Paris Sud, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(2)INRA, UMR1319, Micalis, Jouy-en-Josas, France; AgroParisTech, UMR Micalis, 
Massy, France.
(3)School of Animal and Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Department of 
Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, the United States of 
America.
(4)School of Animal and Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Department of 
Immunobiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, the United States of 
America; Southern Arizona VA Healthcare System, Tucson, Arizona, the United 
States of America.

Clostridium difficile is responsible for 15-20% of antibiotic-associated 
diarrheas, and nearly all cases of pseudomembranous colitis. Among the cell wall 
proteins involved in the colonization process, Cwp84 is a protease that cleaves 
the S-layer protein SlpA into two subunits. A cwp84 mutant was previously shown 
to be affected for in vitro growth but not in its virulence in a hamster model. 
In this study, the cwp84 mutant elaborated biofilms with increased biomass 
compared with the parental strain, allowing the mutant to grow more robustly in 
the biofilm state. Proteomic analyses of the 630Δerm bacteria growing within the 
biofilm revealed the distribution of abundant proteins either in cell surface, 
matrix or supernatant fractions. Of note, the toxin TcdA was found in the 
biofilm matrix. Although the overall proteome differences between the cwp84 
mutant and the parental strains were modest, there was still a significant 
impact on bacterial surface properties such as altered hydrophobicity. In vitro 
and in vivo competition assays revealed that the mutant was significantly 
impaired for growth only in the planktonic state, but not in biofilms or in 
vivo. Taken together, our results suggest that the phenotypes in the cwp84 
mutant come from either the accumulation of uncleaved SlpA, or the ability of 
Cwp84 to cleave as yet undetermined proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124971
PMCID: PMC4414356
PMID: 25922949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


242. Virulence. 2017 Aug 18;8(6):767-781. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2016.1237333. Epub 
2016 Sep 21.

What's a SNP between friends: The influence of single nucleotide polymorphisms 
on virulence and phenotypes of Clostridium difficile strain 630 and derivatives.

Collery MM(1), Kuehne SA(1)(2), McBride SM(3), Kelly ML(1), Monot M(4), Cockayne 
A(1), Dupuy B(4), Minton NP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Clostridia Research Group , BBSRC/EPSRC Synthetic Biology Research Center 
(SBRC), School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham , Nottingham , UK.
(2)b NIHR Biomedical Research Unit in Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases at 
Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust , University of Nottingham , 
Nottingham , UK.
(3)c Department of Microbiology and Immunology , Emory Antibiotic Resistance 
Center, Emory University , Atlanta , GA , USA.
(4)d Laboratoire Pathogenèse des Bactéries Anaérobies , Institut Pasteur , Paris 
, France.

Comment in
    Virulence. 2017 Aug 18;8(6):613-617.

Clostridium difficile is a major cause of antibiotic induced diarrhea worldwide, 
responsible for significant annual mortalities and represents a considerable 
economic burden on healthcare systems. The two main C. difficile virulence 
factors are toxins A and B. Isogenic toxin B mutants of 2 independently isolated 
erythromycin-sensitive derivatives (630E and 630Δerm) of strain 630 were 
previously shown to exhibit substantively different phenotypes. Compared to 630, 
strain 630E and its progeny grow slower, achieve lower final cell densities, 
exhibit a reduced capacity for spore-formation, produce lower levels of toxin 
and are less virulent in the hamster infection model. By the same measures, 
strain 630Δerm and its derivatives more closely mirror the behavior of 630. 
Genome sequencing revealed that 630Δerm had acquired 7 unique Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphisms (SNPs) compared to 630 and 630E, while 630E had 9 SNPs and a DNA 
inversion not found in the other 2 strains. The relatively large number of 
mutations meant that the identification of those responsible for the altered 
properties of 630E was not possible, despite the restoration of 3 mutations to 
wildtype by allelic exchange and comparative RNAseq analysis of all 3 strains. 
The latter analysis revealed large differences in gene expression between the 3 
strains, explaining in part why no single SNP could restore the phenotypic 
differences. Our findings suggest that strain 630Δerm should be favored over 
630E as a surrogate for 630 in genetic-based studies. They also underline the 
importance of effective strain curation and the need to genome re-sequence 
master seed banks wherever possible.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2016.1237333
PMCID: PMC5626343
PMID: 27652799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Vaccine. 2007 May 16;25(20):3946-54. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2007.02.055. Epub 
2007 Mar 7.

Diminished intestinal colonization by Clostridium difficile and immune response 
in mice after mucosal immunization with surface proteins of Clostridium 
difficile.

Péchiné S(1), Janoir C, Boureau H, Gleizes A, Tsapis N, Hoys S, Fattal E, 
Collignon A.

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris-Sud, Faculté de Pharmacie, EA 4043, USC INRA, 5 rue JB 
Clement, F-92296 Châtenay-Malabry cedex, France. severine.pechine@u-psud.fr

Clostridium difficile pathogenesis is mainly due to toxins A and B. However, the 
first step of pathogenesis is the colonization process. We evaluated C. 
difficile surface proteins as vaccine antigens to diminish intestinal 
colonization in a human flora-associated mouse model. First, we used the 
flagellar cap protein FliD of C. difficile, in order to test several 
immunization routes: intranasal, rectal, and intragastric. The rectal route, 
which is the most efficient, was used to vaccine groups of mice with different 
antigen combinations. After immunizations, the mice were challenged with the 
toxigenic C. difficile and a significant statistical difference between the 
control group and the immunized groups was observed in the colonization levels 
of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2007.02.055
PMID: 17433506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. PLoS One. 2018 Jun 12;13(6):e0197467. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0197467. 
eCollection 2018.

OG716: Designing a fit-for-purpose lantibiotic for the treatment of Clostridium 
difficile infections.

Kers JA(1), DeFusco AW(2), Park JH(2), Xu J(3), Pulse ME(4), Weiss WJ(4), 
Handfield M(2).

Author information:
(1)Intrexon Corp., Industrial Products Division, South San Francisco, CA, United 
States of America.
(2)Oragenics, Inc, Alachua, FL, United States of America.
(3)University of Massachusetts Lowell, One University Avenue, Lowell, MA, United 
States of America.
(4)PreClinical Services, UNT System College of Pharmacy, Fort Worth, TX, United 
States of America.

Lantibiotics continue to offer an untapped pipeline for the development of novel 
antibiotics. We report here the discovery of a novel lantibiotic for the 
treatment of C. difficile infection (CDI). The leads were selected from a 
library of over 300 multiple substitution variants of the lantibiotic Mutacin 
1140 (MU1140). Top performers were selected based on testing for superior 
potency, solubility, manufacturability, and physicochemical and/or metabolic 
stability in biologically-relevant systems. The best performers in vitro were 
further evaluated orally in the Golden Syrian hamster model of CDAD. In vivo 
testing ultimately identified OG716 as the lead compound, which conferred 100% 
survival and no relapse at 3 weeks post infection. MU1140-derived variants are 
particularly attractive for further clinical development considering their novel 
mechanism of action.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0197467
PMCID: PMC5997364
PMID: 29894469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JX, MEP and WJW had a financial interest in this 
study as Oragenics sponsored work performed in their respective laboratories. 
JAK was an Intrexon employees during the data collection and initial data 
analysis. AWD was an Oragenics stockholder and employee during data collection 
and initial data analysis. JHP and MH had a financial interest in Oragenics as 
stockholders and employees during data collection, analysis and writing of the 
manuscript. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing 
data and materials.


245. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Mar;52(3):1121-6. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01143-07. 
Epub 2008 Jan 14.

Comparative efficacies of rifaximin and vancomycin for treatment of Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea and prevention of disease recurrence in hamsters.

Kokkotou E(1), Moss AC, Michos A, Espinoza D, Cloud JW, Mustafa N, O'Brien M, 
Pothoulakis C, Kelly CP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Dana 601/East Campus, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Clostridium difficile-associated colitis is an increasing cause of morbidity and 
mortality in hospitalized patients, with high relapse rates following 
conventional therapy. We sought to determine the efficacy of rifaximin, a novel 
nonabsorbed antibiotic, in the hamster model of C. difficile-associated diarrhea 
(CDAD). Hamsters received clindamycin subcutaneously and 24 h later were 
infected by gavage with one of two C. difficile strains: a reference strain (VPI 
10463) and a current epidemic strain (BI17). Vancomycin (50 mg/kg of body 
weight) or rifaximin (100, 50, and 25 mg/kg) were then administered orally for 5 
days beginning either on the same day as infection (prevention) or 24 h later 
(treatment). Therapeutic effects were assessed by weight gain, histology, and 
survival. We found that rifaximin was as effective as vancomycin in the 
prevention and treatment of colitis associated with the two C. difficile strains 
that we examined. There was no relapse after treatment with vancomycin or 
rifaximin in hamsters infected with the BI17 strain. Hamsters infected with the 
VPI 10463 strain and treated with rifaximin did not develop relapsing infection 
within a month of follow-up, whereas the majority of vancomycin-treated animals 
relapsed (0% versus 75%, respectively; P < 0.01). In conclusion, rifaximin was 
found to be an effective prophylactic and therapeutic agent for CDAD in hamsters 
and was not associated with disease recurrence. These findings, in conjunction 
with the pharmacokinetic and safety profiles of rifaximin, suggest that it is an 
attractive candidate for clinical use for CDAD.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01143-07
PMCID: PMC2258528
PMID: 18195066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Anaerobe. 2013 Jun;21:28-33. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.03.010. Epub 2013 Mar 
29.

Protective effect of a mixture of kefir-isolated lactic acid bacteria and yeasts 
in a hamster model of Clostridium difficile infection.

Bolla PA(1), Carasi P, Bolla Mde L, De Antoni GL, Serradell Mde L.

Author information:
(1)Cátedra de Microbiología, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Argentina. 
pbolla@quimica.unlp.edu.ar

The objective of this work was to test the protective effect of a mixture (MM) 
constituted by kefir-isolated microorganisms (Lactobacillus plantarum, 
Lactobacillus kefir, Lc. lactis, Kluyveromyces marxianus and Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae) in a hamster model of infection with Clostridium difficile, an 
anaerobic Gram-positive bacterium that causes diarrhoea. Placebo or MM was 
administered ad libitum in drinking water from day 0 to the end of treatment. 
Hamsters received orally 200 μg of clyndamicin at day 7 and then were infected 
with 1 × 10(8) CFU of C. difficile by gavage. Development of diarrhoea and death 
was registered until the end of the protocol. Surviving animals were sacrificed 
at day 16, and a test for biological activity of clostridial toxins and 
histological stainings were performed in caecum samples. Six of seven infected 
animals developed diarrhoea and 5/7 died at the end of the experimental 
protocol. The histological sections showed oedema and inflammatory infiltrates 
with neutrophils and crypt abscesses. In the group of animals infected and 
treated with MM1/1000, only 1 of 7 hamsters showed diarrhoea and none of them 
died. The histological sections showed only a slight thickening of the mucosa 
with presence of lymphocytic infiltrate. These results demonstrate that an oral 
treatment with a mixture of kefir-isolated bacteria and yeasts was able to 
prevent diarrhoea and enterocolitis triggered by C. difficile.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.03.010
PMID: 23542116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Nov;56(11):5986-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00015-12. 
Epub 2012 Aug 6.

In vitro and in vivo activities of the novel Ketolide RBx 14255 against 
Clostridium difficile.

Kumar M(1), Mathur T, Barman TK, Ramkumar G, Bhati A, Shukla G, Kalia V, Pandya 
M, Raj VS, Upadhyay DJ, Vaishnavi C, Chakrabarti A, Das B, Bhatnagar PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, New Drug Discovery Research, Ranbaxy 
Research Laboratories, Gurgaon, India.

The MIC(90) of RBx 14255, a novel ketolide, against Clostridium difficile was 4 
μg/ml (MIC range, 0.125 to 8 μg/ml), and this drug was found to be more potent 
than comparator drugs. An in vitro time-kill kinetics study of RBx 14255 showed 
time-dependent bacterial killing for C. difficile. Furthermore, in the hamster 
model of C. difficile infection, RBx 14255 demonstrated greater efficacy than 
metronidazole and vancomycin, making it a promising candidate for C. difficile 
treatment.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00015-12
PMCID: PMC3486553
PMID: 22869573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Gut Microbes. 2010 Jan;1(1):58-64. doi: 10.4161/gmic.1.1.10768.

The role of toxin A and toxin B in Clostridium difficile-associated disease: 
Past and present perspectives.

Carter GP(1), Rood JI, Lyras D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology; Monash University; Clayton, VIC Australia.

Comment on
    Lyras D, O'Connor JR, Howarth PM, Sambol SP, Carter GP, Phumoonna T, et al. 
Toxin B is essential for virulence of Clostridium difficile. Nature. 
2009;458:1176–1179. doi: 10.1038/nature07822.

Recently, we constructed and characterized isogenic tcdA and tcdB mutants of a 
virulent Clostridium difficile strain and used a hamster model of disease to 
demonstrate that toxin B, not toxin A, is essential for virulence of this 
emerging pathogen. Earlier studies had shown that purified toxin A alone was 
able to induce C. difficile disease pathology and that purified toxin B was not 
effective unless it was co-administered with toxin A, suggesting that the toxins 
act synergistically. In this addendum we discuss this paradigm-shifting 
conclusion in the context of current strain epidemiology, particularly with 
respect to naturally occurring toxin A-negative, toxin B-positive isolates and 
the NAP1/027 epidemic isolates. The role of toxin receptors and how variant 
toxins might exert their effects is also discussed in relation to the published 
data. We conclude that it is critical to use the natural infection process to 
dissect the role of toxins in disease, and that future studies are contingent on 
such work. The impact and importance of animal models of C. difficile virulence 
are therefore considered within this frame of reference.

DOI: 10.4161/gmic.1.1.10768
PMCID: PMC2906822
PMID: 20664812


249. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2003 Jul;52(1):96-102. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkg267. Epub 
2003 May 29.

Effects of cefotaxime and desacetylcefotaxime upon Clostridium difficile 
proliferation and toxin production in a triple-stage chemostat model of the 
human gut.

Freeman J(1), O'Neill FJ, Wilcox MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Leeds and The General Infirmary, 
Leeds LS2 9JT, UK.

Clostridium difficile is recognized as an important nosocomial pathogen. C. 
difficile infection (CDI) is thought to arise as a result of depletion of the 
normal gut flora by antimicrobial agents. Cefotaxime (CTX) is well-known for its 
propensity to cause CDI, but the reasons behind its particular predisposition to 
the disease remain unclear. Previous investigations have so far relied upon the 
hamster model of CDI or human volunteers. We have used a triple-stage chemostat 
model of the human gut to investigate the behaviour of C. difficile and 
components of the normal gut flora, in response to exposure to CTX alone, and in 
combination with its active metabolite desacetylcefotaxime (dCTX). C. difficile 
remained in a steady state during non-antibiotic exposed periods, with no 
detectable cytotoxin. During both antibiotic exposure regimens, proliferation of 
C. difficile and elevated cytotoxin levels were observed. Cessation of 
antibiotic instillation produced a reduction in cytotoxin levels and viable 
counts. Decreases in bacterial counts were observed in response to both 
antibiotic exposure regimens, notably for bifidobacteria and bacteroides. 
Numbers of bacteroides were profoundly affected by exposure to the CTX/dCTX 
combination, and this may indicate a possible role for bacteroides in 
colonization resistance. We believe that the gut model is a promising method for 
studying C. difficile pathogenesis in conditions analogous to the in vivo 
situation.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkg267
PMID: 12775682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2005 Oct;56(4):717-25. doi: 10.1093/jac/dki321. Epub 
2005 Sep 5.

Comparison of the efficacy of ramoplanin and vancomycin in both in vitro and in 
vivo models of clindamycin-induced Clostridium difficile infection.

Freeman J(1), Baines SD, Jabes D, Wilcox MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Leeds and The General Infirmary, 
Old Medical School, Leeds, LS1 3EX, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Treatment of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is limited 
primarily to either metronidazole or vancomycin. We compared vancomycin and a 
novel glycolipodepsipeptide, ramoplanin, in both hamster and in vitro gut models 
of clindamycin-induced CDI.
METHODS: We used an in vitro triple-stage chemostat model that simulates the 
human gut, and an in vivo hamster model, both primed with clindamycin.
RESULTS: Clindamycin exposure elicited symptomatic disease in the hamster model, 
and promoted C. difficile germination and toxin production in the gut model. C. 
difficile germination and toxin production were not associated with depletion of 
gut microflora in the gut model, but were temporarily associated with 
subinhibitory concentrations of clindamycin. Both ramoplanin and vancomycin were 
associated with rapid symptom resolution in the hamster model, and rapid toxin 
titre decrease in the in vitro gut model. In both models of CDI, vancomycin was 
associated with greater persistence of C. difficile spores. C. difficile spores 
were recovered significantly more often from the caecal contents of 
vancomycin-treated (n = 19/23) compared with ramoplanin-treated (n = 6/23) 
hamsters (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Results from the in vitro gut and hamster models were concordant. 
Ramoplanin and vancomycin were similarly effective at reducing cytotoxin 
production in the gut CDI model and in resolving symptoms in the hamster model. 
Ramoplanin may be more effective than vancomycin at killing spores and 
preventing spore recrudescence. These findings suggest a potential therapeutic 
role for ramoplanin in CDI that requires further clinical investigation.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dki321
PMID: 16143709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Med Microbiol. 1987 Aug;24(1):53-64. doi: 10.1099/00222615-24-1-53.

Clostridium difficile--a spectrum of virulence and analysis of putative 
virulence determinants in the hamster model of antibiotic-associated colitis.

Borriello SP, Ketley JM, Mitchell TJ, Barclay FE, Welch AR, Price AB, Stephen J.

Each of nine different toxigenic strains of Clostridium difficile was 
administered orally to groups of hamsters pre-treated with clindamycin and 
housed individually in sterile isolator boxes. Faecal pellets and caecal 
contents from well, diarrhoeic, moribund and freshly dead animals were analysed 
for C. difficile and toxins A (enterotoxin) and B (cytotoxin), and tissue 
obtained when animals were killed was examined histologically. Not all strains 
were equally virulent in this model. Four strains of C. difficile killed all 
animals within 48 h and are designated as highly virulent for hamsters. These 
strains were clinical isolates from three cases of disease in man and one case 
in a hamster. Five strains caused death of some animals but only after 5 and upt 
to 13 days and are designated as less virulent for hamsters. These strains were 
isolated from asymptomatic infants (2) and household pets (2), and from the 
environment (1). The surviving test hamsters were killed after 14 days and, in 
most cases, were colonised by C. difficile, though levels of toxins A and B in 
caecal contents were low. None of the cultures used for challenge was capsulate 
or hydrophobic. There was no correlation between virulence and production of 
toxins A and B in vitro in tryptic-nitrate broth. With two strains examined, 
there was a correlation between virulence and toxin A (but not toxin B) 
production in caecal emulsions derived from clindamycin pre-treated hamsters. 
Caecal contents from the majority of moribund and freshly dead animals had 
quantities of toxin A sufficient to cause disease or death if given 
orogastrically. Toxin B was not produced in a fixed ratio with toxin A. The data 
support the view that high virulence of C. difficile is determined by efficient 
disease-inducing colonisation of the gut and the ability to generate, rapidly, 
high levels of toxin A in vivo.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-24-1-53
PMID: 3612744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Sep 22;61(10):e00543-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00543-17. Print 2017 Oct.

Protection of Hamsters from Mortality by Reducing Fecal Moxifloxacin 
Concentration with DAV131A in a Model of Moxifloxacin-Induced Clostridium 
difficile Colitis.

Burdet C(1)(2), Sayah-Jeanne S(3), Nguyen TT(1), Miossec C(3), Saint-Lu N(3), 
Pulse M(4), Weiss W(4), Andremont A(1)(2), Mentré F(1)(2), de Gunzburg J(5).

Author information:
(1)INSERM & Paris Diderot University, IAME, UMR 1137, Paris, France.
(2)AP-HP, Bichat Hospital, Paris, France.
(3)Da Volterra, Paris, France.
(4)UNT Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.
(5)Da Volterra, Paris, France gunzburg@davolterra.com.

Lowering the gut exposure to antibiotics during treatments can prevent 
microbiota disruption. We evaluated the effects of an activated charcoal-based 
adsorbent, DAV131A, on the fecal free moxifloxacin concentration and mortality 
in a hamster model of moxifloxacin-induced Clostridium difficile infection. A 
total of 215 hamsters receiving moxifloxacin subcutaneously (day 1 [D1] to D5) 
were orally infected at D3 with C. difficile spores. They received various doses 
(0 to 1,800 mg/kg of body weight/day) and schedules (twice a day [BID] or three 
times a day [TID]) of DAV131A (D1 to D8). Moxifloxacin concentrations and C. 
difficile counts were determined at D3, and mortality was determined at D12 We 
compared mortality rates, moxifloxacin concentrations, and C. difficile counts 
according to DAV131A regimen and modeled the links between DAV131A regimen, 
moxifloxacin concentration, and mortality. All hamsters that received no DAV131A 
died, but none of those that received 1,800 mg/kg/day died. Significant 
dose-dependent relationships between DAV131A dose and (i) mortality, (ii) 
moxifloxacin concentration, and (iii) C. difficile count were evidenced. 
Mathematical modeling suggested that (i) lowering the moxifloxacin concentration 
at D3, which was 58 μg/g (95% confidence interval [CI] = 50 to 66 μg/g) without 
DAV131A, to 17 μg/g (14 to 21 μg/g) would reduce mortality by 90%; and (ii) this 
would be achieved with a daily DAV131A dose of 703 mg/kg (596 to 809 mg/kg). In 
this model of C. difficile infection, DAV131A reduced mortality in a 
dose-dependent manner by decreasing the fecal free moxifloxacin concentration.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00543-17
PMCID: PMC5610506
PMID: 28739791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Euro Surveill. 2014 Nov 13;19(45):20954. doi: 
10.2807/1560-7917.es2014.19.45.20954.

Whole genome sequencing reveals potential spread of Clostridium difficile 
between humans and farm animals in the Netherlands, 2002 to 2011.

Knetsch CW(1), Connor TR, Mutreja A, van Dorp SM, Sanders IM, Browne HP, Harris 
D, Lipman L, Keessen EC, Corver J, Kuijper EJ, Lawley TD.

Author information:
(1)Section Experimental Bacteriology, Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.

Farm animals are a potential reservoir for human Clostridium difficile infection 
(CDI), particularly PCR ribotype 078 which is frequently found in animals and 
humans. Here, whole genome single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analysis was 
used to study the evolutionary relatedness of C. difficile 078 isolated from 
humans and animals on Dutch pig farms. All sequenced genomes were surveyed for 
potential antimicrobial resistance determinants and linked to an antimicrobial 
resistance phenotype. We sequenced the whole genome of 65 C. difficile 078 
isolates collected between 2002 and 2011 from pigs (n = 19), asymptomatic 
farmers (n = 15) and hospitalised patients (n = 31) in the Netherlands. The 
collection included 12 pairs of human and pig isolates from 2011 collected at 12 
different pig farms. A mutation rate of 1.1 SNPs per genome per year was 
determined for C. difficile 078. Importantly, we demonstrate that farmers and 
pigs were colonised with identical (no SNP differences) and nearly identical 
(less than two SNP differences) C. difficile clones. Identical tetracycline and 
streptomycin resistance determinants were present in human and animal C. 
difficile 078 isolates. Our observation that farmers and pigs share identical C. 
difficile strains suggests transmission between these populations, although we 
cannot exclude the possibility of transmission from a common environmental 
source.

DOI: 10.2807/1560-7917.es2014.19.45.20954
PMCID: PMC4518193
PMID: 25411691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Zentralbl Veterinarmed B. 1993 May;40(3):222-6. doi: 
10.1111/j.1439-0450.1993.tb00131.x.

Intestinal carriage of Clostridium difficile in neonate dogs.

Perrin J(1), Buogo C, Gallusser A, Burnens AP, Nicolet J.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Veterinary Bacteriology, University of Berne, Switzerland.

A total of 70 puppies and their dams, distributed in 14 litters, were submitted 
to weekly fecal examinations for C. difficile during the first 10 weeks after 
birth. During the study, 94.3% of the puppies and 42.9% of the dams harboured C. 
difficile at least once in their feces. We calculated that 58% of the puppies 
carried toxigenic C. difficile at least once during the survey. In the puppies, 
C. difficile carriage rates ranging from 3.1% to 67.1% were observed at 
different moments of the observation period. In comparison, C. difficile 
carriage rate was 1.4% in a control group of healthy dogs more than 3 months 
old. Discrepancies in the toxigenic phenotype of the C. difficile strains 
isolated in the same litter showed that the neonate dogs were transiently 
infected with different strains, and that the dam is often not the source of 
infection with C. difficile. We could not demonstrate any pathogenicity of C. 
difficile for neonate dogs.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1439-0450.1993.tb00131.x
PMID: 8342371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Gut Microbes. 2015 Jul 4;6(4):221-4. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2015.1062965. Epub 
2015 Jun 19.

Glucosyltransferase activity of Clostridium difficile Toxin B is essential for 
disease pathogenesis.

Yang Z(1), Zhang Y, Huang T, Feng H.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Microbial Pathogenesis ; University of Maryland Dental School 
; Baltimore , MD USA.

Clostridium difficile TcdB harbors a glucosyltransferase that targets host Rho 
GTPases. However, the role of the enzyme activity in the induction of host 
intestinal disease has not been demonstrated. In this study, we established a 
mouse acute intestinal disease model by cecum injection of wild type and 
glucosyltransferase-deficient TcdB and a chronic model by delivering toxin 
intraluminally via engineered surrogate host Bacillus megaterium. We 
demonstrated, for the first time, that the glucosyltransferase activity of TcdB 
is essential for inducing disease symptoms and intestinal pathological responses 
that resemble human disease, highlighting the importance of targeting toxin 
glucosyltransferase activity for future therapy.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2015.1062965
PMCID: PMC4615278
PMID: 26091306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2014 Jan;20(1):O2-6. doi: 10.1111/1469-0691.12296. Epub 
2013 Aug 8.

Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 046 is common among neonatal pigs and humans 
in Sweden.

Norén T(1), Johansson K, Unemo M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Microbiology, Örebro University Hospital, 
Örebro, Sweden.

Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 046 was found in 67% of neonatal piglets 
(45/67) sampled from three separate pig-breeding farms in Sweden. Sows from the 
same farms were tested and 50% were colonized in faeces and 30% were colonized 
on skin. An environmental source was suggested because identical PCR ribotypes 
were isolated from faeces as well as externally. Human C. difficile infection 
outbreaks in southern Sweden by the identical PCR ribotype 046 indicate its 
zoonotic potential.

© 2013 The Authors Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2013 European Society 
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/1469-0691.12296
PMID: 23927574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Infect Dis. 2011 Jun 1;203(11):1613-20. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir112.

Clostridium difficile transcriptome analysis using pig ligated loop model 
reveals modulation of pathways not modulated in vitro.

Scaria J(1), Janvilisri T, Fubini S, Gleed RD, McDonough SP, Chang YF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

A pig ligated loop model was used to analyze the in vivo transcriptome response 
of Clostridium difficile. Bacterial RNA from the loops was retrieved at 
different times and was used for microarray analysis. Several 
virulence-associated genes and genes involved in sporulation cascade were 
differentially expressed (DE). In concordance with observed upregulation of 
toxin genes in microarray, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay estimation of total 
toxin showed high amounts of toxin in the loops. Several genes that were absent 
in primary annotation of C. difficile 630 but annotated in a secondary 
annotation were found to be DE. Pathway comparison of DE genes in vitro and in 
vivo showed that when several pathways were expressed in all conditions, several 
of the C. difficile pathways were uniquely expressed only in vivo. The pathways 
observed to be modulated only in this study could be targets of new therapeutic 
agents against C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jir112
PMCID: PMC3096783
PMID: 21592991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 26;8(11):e81112. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081112. 
eCollection 2013.

Immunization using GroEL decreases Clostridium difficile intestinal 
colonization.

Péchiné S(1), Hennequin C, Boursier C, Hoys S, Collignon A.

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Sud, Faculté de Pharmacie, Equipe d'Accueil 4043, Unité Sous 
Contrat Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Clostridium difficile is a pathogen which is responsible for diarrhea and 
colitis, particularly after treatment with antibiotics. Clinical signs are 
mainly due to two toxins, TcdA and TcdB. However, the first step of pathogenesis 
is the colonization process. We evaluated C. difficile surface proteins as 
vaccine antigens in the hamster model to prevent intestinal colonization. This 
vaccination induced a partial protection of hamsters against death after a C. 
difficile challenge. A proteomic analysis of animal sera allowed us to identify 
proteins which could be responsible for the protection observed. Among these 
proteins, we identified the GroEL heat shock protein. To confirm the role of the 
specific GroEL antibodies in the delayed C. difficile colonization of hamsters, 
we performed an immunization assay in a mouse model. After intranasal 
immunization with the recombinant protein GroEL, we observed a lower C. 
difficile intestinal colonization in the immunized group as compared to the 
control group.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081112
PMCID: PMC3841151
PMID: 24303034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


259. J Food Prot. 2013 Apr;76(4):624-30. doi: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-12-330.

Longitudinal study of Clostridium difficile and Methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus associated with pigs from weaning through to the end of 
processing.

Hawken P(1), Weese JS, Friendship R, Warriner K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

There has been a recent increase in community-associated infections linked to 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Clostridium difficile. It 
is established that both pathogens can be recovered from retail pork, although 
it is unclear to what degree contamination is acquired at the farm in comparison 
to that acquired during processing. To address this gap, the following study 
reports on the carriage of MRSA and C. difficile on pigs from birth through to 
the end of processing. C. difficile was isolated from 28 (93%) of 30 pigs at 1 
day of age, but prevalence declined sharply to 1 of 26 by market age (188 days). 
MRSA prevalence peaked at 74 days of age, with 19 (68%) of 28 pigs testing 
positive, but declined to 3 of 26 at 150 days of age, with no pig being detected 
as positive at market age. At the processing facility, C. difficile was isolated 
from the holding area, with a single carcass testing positive for the pathogen 
at preevisceration. MRSA was primarily isolated from nasal swabs with 8 (31%) 
carcasses testing positive at postbleed, which increased to 14 (54%) positive at 
postscald tanks. Only one carcass (sampled at postbleed) tested positive for 
MRSA, with no recovery of the pathogen from environmental samples taken. C. 
difficile ribotype 078 predominated in the longitudinal portion of the study, 
accounting for all of the 68 isolates recovered from pigs. Only three C. 
difficile isolates, which were identified as ribotype 078, were recovered at the 
slaughterhouse. MRSA spa type 539 (t034) predominated in pigs on the farm and 
samples taken at the slaughterhouse, accounting for 80% of all isolates 
recovered. The study demonstrated that both C. difficile and MRSA acquired on 
the farm can be transferred through to processing, although no evidence for 
significant cross-contamination between carcasses or the slaughterhouse 
environment was evident.

DOI: 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-12-330
PMID: 23575124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Infect Immun. 1991 Apr;59(4):1223-30. doi: 10.1128/IAI.59.4.1223-1230.1991.

Binding kinetics of Clostridium difficile toxins A and B to intestinal brush 
border membranes from infant and adult hamsters.

Rolfe RD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Texas Tech University Health 
Sciences Center, Lubbock 79430.

This study was undertaken to determine if the relative resistance of neonates 
and infants to Clostridium difficile-associated intestinal disease can be 
related to age-dependent differences in intestinal receptors for C. difficile 
toxins A and B. Brush border membranes (BBMs) from the small intestines of adult 
and infant hamsters were examined for their ability to bind radiolabeled toxins 
A and B. [125I]toxin A bound to both infant and adult hamster BBMs at 
physiological temperature, whereas [125I]toxin B did not bind to the BBMs under 
any of the conditions examined. The number of [125I]toxin A molecules bound at 
saturation was approximately 4 x 10(10) per micrograms of membrane protein for 
adult BBMs and 1 x 10(11) per micrograms of membrane protein for infant BBMs. 
Scatchard plot analysis suggested the presence of a single class of toxin A 
binding sites on both infant and adult hamster BBMs. Maximal binding capacity 
and Kd values were 0.63 pmol/mg of protein and 66.7 nM, respectively, for the 
infant BBMs, and 0.24 pmol/mg of protein and 27 nM, respectively, for the adult 
BBMs. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoretic analyses of 
extracted BBM proteins revealed differences in the proteins of infant and adult 
BBMs. However, there were not any detectable differences in the protein bands 
which bound [125I]toxin A between infant and adult hamsters. The results from 
these investigations indicate that differences in the binding kinetics of toxins 
A and/or B to infant and adult hamster BBMs do not account for the observed 
differences in their susceptibility to C. difficile-associated intestinal 
disease.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.59.4.1223-1230.1991
PMCID: PMC257831
PMID: 1900806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2010 Feb;58(1):58-61. doi: 10.1016/j.patbio.2009.07.001. 
Epub 2009 Nov 4.

[Comparison of three Clostridium difficile culture media: interest of enhancing 
spore germination media?].

[Article in French]

Rousseau C(1), Poilane I, Diakite F, Feghoul L, Cruaud P, Collignon A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Hôpital Jean-Verdier-René-Muret, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, avenue du 14-Juillet, 93143 Bondy cedex, France.

AIM: Clostridium difficile is the most common agent of postantibiotic and 
nosocomial bacterial diarrhoea. Since the emergence of the highly virulent and 
epidemic strain NAP1/027 in Europe, it appears necessary to isolate C. difficile 
strains to realize an epidemiologic follow-up by molecular typing. The aim of 
this work was to compare three selective culture conditions for the isolation of 
C. difficile.
METHODS: One hundred and thirty stools collected from patients hospitalized at 
Jean Verdier were swabbed on the commercial medium CLO (BioMérieux) and on a 
medium prepared at the laboratory (CCTa: Columbia, cefoxitine 8 mg/l, 
cycloserine 250 mg/l, horse blood 5 %, sodium taurocholate 0.1 %) with and 
without preliminary alcoholic shock (EtOH). C. difficile was isolated from 38 
stools and colonies were counted on each medium.
RESULTS: The fluorescence intensity of C. difficile colonies is comparable on 
CLO and CCTa-EtOH media, however their aspect is more characteristic on CLO. 
This medium appears very selective contrary to the CCTa medium on which an 
associated flora obstructs the fluorescence reading and requires a new isolation 
of the suspect strains. On average 30 times more colonies of C. difficile are 
counted on CCTa+/-EtOH than on CLO, suggesting the presence of great proportions 
of spores in the stools.
CONCLUSIONS: The medium CLO is successful for the isolation of C. difficile 
despite of its selectivity. Nevertheless, it appears interesting to associate a 
medium enhancing spore germination as the CCTa medium inoculated after alcoholic 
shock to increase the sensitivity of detection while being freed from 
conservation and transport conditions.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.patbio.2009.07.001
PMID: 19892495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2018 Aug 22;5(8):ofy179. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofy179. 
eCollection 2018 Aug.

Using Dog Scent Detection as a Point-of-Care Tool to Identify Toxigenic 
Clostridium difficile in Stool.

Taylor MT(1)(2), McCready J(1)(2), Broukhanski G(3)(4), Kirpalaney S(5), Lutz 
H(5), Powis J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Michael Garron 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Family Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada.
(3)Public Health Ontario Laboratories, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, 
Canada.
(5)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland School of Medicine, Dublin, Ireland.

We evaluated the operating characteristics of 2 comparably trained dogs as a 
"point-of-care" diagnostic tool to detect toxin gene-positive Clostridium 
difficile. Although each dog could detect toxin gene-positive C difficile in 
stool specimens with sensitivities of 77.6 and 92.6 and specificities of 85.1 
and 84.5, respectively, interrater reliability is only modest (Cohen's kappa 
0.52), limiting widespread application.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofy179
PMCID: PMC6105104
PMID: 30151408


263. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2000 Sep;44(9):2254-8. doi: 
10.1128/aac.44.9.2254-2258.2000.

In vitro and in vivo activities of nitazoxanide against Clostridium difficile.

McVay CS(1), Rolfe RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Texas Tech University Health 
Sciences Center, Lubbock 79430, USA.

We have used the hamster model of antibiotic-induced Clostridium difficile 
intestinal disease to evaluate nitazoxanide (NTZ), a nitrothiazole benzamide 
antimicrobial agent. The following in vitro and in vivo activities of NTZ in the 
adult hamster were examined and compared to those of metronidazole and 
vancomycin: (i) MICs and minimum bactericidal concentrations (MBCs) against C. 
difficile, (ii) toxicity, (iii) ability to prevent C. difficile-associated 
ileocecitis, and (iv) propensity to induce C. difficile-associated ileocecitis. 
The MICs and MBCs of NTZ against 15 toxigenic strains of C. difficile were 
comparable to those of vancomycin or metronidazole. C. difficile-associated 
ileocecitis was induced with oral clindamycin and toxigenic C. difficile in a 
group of 60 hamsters. Subgroups of 10 hamsters were given six daily intragastric 
treatments of NTZ (15, 7.5, and 3.0 mg/100 g of body weight [gbw]), 
metronidazole (15 mg/100 gbw), vancomycin (5 mg/100 gbw), or saline (1 ml/100 
gbw). Animals receiving saline died 3 days post-C. difficile challenge. During 
the treatment period, NTZ (>/=7.5 mg/100 gbw), like metronidazole and 
vancomycin, prevented outward manifestations of clindamycin-induced C. difficile 
intestinal disease. Six of ten hamsters on a scheduled dose of 3.0 mg of NTZ/100 
gbw survived for the complete treatment period. Of these surviving animals, all 
but three died of C. difficile disease by between 3 and 12 days following 
discontinuation of antibiotic therapy. Another group of hamsters received six 
similar daily doses of the three antibiotics, followed by an inoculation with 
toxigenic C. difficile. All of the NTZ-treated animals survived the 15-day 
postinfection period. Upon necropsy, all hamsters appeared normal: there were no 
gross signs of toxicity or C. difficile intestinal disease, nor was C. difficile 
detected in the cultures of the ceca of these animals. By contrast, vancomycin 
and metronidazole treatment induced fatal C. difficile intestinal disease in 20 
and 70% of recipients, respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.44.9.2254-2258.2000
PMCID: PMC90054
PMID: 10952564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Vet Intern Med. 2003 Nov-Dec;17(6):813-6. doi: 
10.1111/j.1939-1676.2003.tb02519.x.

Outbreak of Clostridium difficile-associated disease in a small animal 
veterinary teaching hospital.

Weese JS(1), Armstrong J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada. 
jsweese@uoguelph.ca

An apparent outbreak of enteric disease occurred in dogs and cats at a 
veterinary teaching hospital. Clostridium difficile Toxin A or B or both were 
identified in 1 or more fecal samples from 48 of 93 (52%) dogs over a 5-month 
period, 30 of which were identified in the 1st 26 days, after which strict 
infection control measures, including closure to elective cases, were 
implemented. Affected animals included in-patients, out-patients that were 
housed temporarily in the wards, and resident blood donor dogs. Infection 
control measures, including partial depopulation, isolation, hospital and yard 
cleaning, and barrier precautions, were instituted, after which, the incidence 
of nosocomial diarrhea decreased from 19 cases per 1,000 admissions to 2.5 cases 
per 1,000 admissions (P < 0.001).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-1676.2003.tb02519.x
PMCID: PMC7202293
PMID: 14658717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2006 Dec;24(11-12):1525-34. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2036.2006.03157.x.

Review article: tolevamer, a novel toxin-binding polymer: overview of 
preclinical pharmacology and physicochemical properties.

Barker RH Jr(1), Dagher R, Davidson DM, Marquis JK.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacology and Preclinical Development, Genzyme Drug Discovery and 
Development, Waltham, MA 02541, USA. robert.barker@genzyme.com

BACKGROUND: Tolevamer is a novel toxin-binding polymer that is currently being 
investigated in clinical trials for the treatment of patients who have 
Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhoea.
AIMS: To summarize the results of in vitro and in vivo preclinical studies of 
tolevamer. In contrast to antibiotics, tolevamer binds C. difficile toxins to 
interrupt toxin-mediated intestinal inflammation and tissue damage, and does not 
demonstrate direct antimicrobial activity.
METHODS: Pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics were studied in rats and dogs; 
efficacy was studied in a hamster model.
RESULTS: Studies in rats and dogs indicate that tolevamer is essentially 
non-absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and show that drug interactions 
with commonly used therapies are unlikely. Pharmacologic studies indicate that 
tolevamer reduces disease severity and recurrence rates in the hamster model of 
C. difficile-associated diarrhoea and blocks the enterotoxic effects of toxin A 
in rat ileum. The binding parameters calculated for the interaction of tolevamer 
with toxins A and B provide a reasonable physicochemical model that supports the 
potential clinical utility of tolevamer.
CONCLUSIONS: These preclinical results are consistent with the effectiveness and 
safety profile of tolevamer observed in clinical studies in patients with C. 
difficile-associated diarrhoea.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2036.2006.03157.x
PMID: 17206941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Mar;56(3):1624-6. doi: 10.1128/AAC.06097-11. 
Epub 2011 Dec 27.

A novel agent effective against Clostridium difficile infection.

Dvoskin S(1), Xu WC, Brown NC, Yanachkov IB, Yanachkova M, Wright GE.

Author information:
(1)GLSynthesis, Inc Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

N(2)-(3,4-Dichlorobenzyl)-7-(2-[1-morpholinyl]ethyl)guanine (MorE-DCBG, 362E) is 
a synthetic purine that selectively inhibits the replication-specific DNA 
polymerase of Clostridium difficile. MorE-DCBG and its analogs strongly 
inhibited the growth of a wide variety of C. difficile strains. When 
administered orally in a hamster model of C. difficile-specific colitis, 362E 
was as effective as oral vancomycin, the current agent of choice for treating 
severe forms of the human disease.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.06097-11
PMCID: PMC3294905
PMID: 22203600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Ir Vet J. 2016 Aug 19;69:10. doi: 10.1186/s13620-016-0070-9. eCollection 2015.

Typhlocolitis associated with Clostridium difficile ribotypes 078 and 110 in 
neonatal piglets from a commercial Irish pig herd.

McElroy MC(1), Hill M(1), Moloney G(2), Mac Aogáin M(2), McGettrick S(1), 
O'Doherty Á(1), Rogers TR(2).

Author information:
(1)Pathology Division, Central Veterinary Research Laboratory, Backweston 
Campus, Celbridge, Co. Kildare Ireland.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile is a recognised cause of typhlocolitis and 
diarrhoea in neonatal pigs but has never been confirmed in association with 
pathology and disease in Irish pigs.
CASE PRESENTATION: Four neonatal piglets, with a history of diarrhoea were 
referred to the Central Veterinary Research Laboratory, Backweston for necropsy. 
They were from a fully integrated, commercial pig farm with approximately 1000 
sows. Three piglets had acute, superficial, erosive and suppurative 
typhlocolitis and the other had mild suppurative mesocolitis. Clostridium 
difficile (C. difficile) toxins A/B were detected using ELISA in the colonic 
contents from each piglet. C. difficile isolates from two of the piglets were 
PCR-ribotyped as 078 and an isolate from a third pig was ribotyped as 110.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report confirming C. difficile in association 
with typhlocolitis in Irish pigs.

DOI: 10.1186/s13620-016-0070-9
PMCID: PMC4992205
PMID: 27547375


268. Rev Infect Dis. 1984 Mar-Apr;6 Suppl 1:S208-13. doi: 
10.1093/clinids/6.supplement_1.s208.

Antimicrobial agent-associated colitis and diarrhea: historical background and 
clinical aspects.

George WL.

In the late 1970s it was found that Clostridium difficile causes a lethal, 
clindamycin-induced ileocecitis in the Syrian hamster; this animal model has 
been an invaluable aid to our understanding of antimicrobial agent-induced 
diarrhea in humans. C. difficile is involved in almost all cases of 
pseudomembranous colitis and in approximately one-fourth of cases of 
antimicrobial agent-associated diarrhea in humans in which a pseudomembrane is 
not detected. The presenting signs and symptoms of C. difficile-induced diarrhea 
are quite variable. Mild diarrhea may be the only finding in the least severe 
form of disease, whereas patients with severe disease may have high fever, 
leukocytosis, severe abdominal cramping, marked abdominal tenderness, and 
profuse diarrhea. Occasionally, symptoms may be so marked as to simulate an 
acute intraabdominal catastrophe. Diagnosis of C. difficile-induced disease 
usually is made by detecting C. difficile cytotoxin in the feces of a patient. 
Assay for cytotoxin in feces of infants is not reliable for diagnosis, however, 
because of the high incidence of an asymptomatic carrier state in this group. 
Appropriate therapy includes discontinuation of the offending antimicrobial 
agent and administration of oral vancomycin when specific antibacterial 
treatment is indicated.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/6.supplement_1.s208
PMID: 6372031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Emerg Infect Dis. 2013 May;19(5):790-2. doi: 10.3201/eid1905.121062.

Novel molecular type of Clostridium difficile in neonatal pigs, Western 
Australia.

Squire MM(1), Carter GP, Mackin KE, Chakravorty A, Norén T, Elliott B, Lyras D, 
Riley TV.

Author information:
(1)The University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.

Clostridium difficile causes neonatal enteritis in piglets; strains of PCR 
ribotype 078 are most commonly identified. We investigated C. difficile 
prevalence in piglets in Australia and isolated a novel strain with a unique 
pathogenicity locus. In a mouse infection model, this strain produced more 
weight loss than did a ribotype 078 strain.

DOI: 10.3201/eid1905.121062
PMCID: PMC3647499
PMID: 23697508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Microb Drug Resist. 2004 Spring;10(1):57-63. doi: 10.1089/107662904323047817.

Antimicrobial susceptibility of equine and environmental isolates of Clostridium 
difficile.

Båverud V(1), Gunnarsson A, Karlsson M, Franklin A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, National Veterinary Institute, SE-751 89 Uppsala, 
Sweden. viveca.baverud@sva.se

The antimicrobial susceptibility of 50 Clostridium difficile isolates, 36 of 
them from horse feces and 14 from environmental sites, was determined by broth 
microdilution. The antimicrobial agents tested were avilamycin, cephalothin, 
chloramphenicol, clindamycin, erythromycin, gentamicin, neomycin, oxacillin, 
oxytetracycline, penicillin, spiramycin, streptomycin, 
trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, vancomycin, and virginiamycin. All isolates were 
susceptible to vancomycin (MIC </=1 microg/ml). The MICs of erythromycin, 
oxytetracycline, spiramycin, and virginiamycin showed a bimodal distribution. 
Compared with the majority of isolates, the MICs of erythromycin (MIC > 16 
microg/ml), oxytetracycline (MIC >/=32 microg/ml), spiramycin (MIC > 16 
microg/ml), and virginiamycin (MIC 8-16 microg/ml) were higher for 18 isolates. 
Those were mainly isolated from horses at animal hospitals and further from 
environmental sites at a stud farm. In contrast, all isolates, except one, from 
healthy foals had low MICs of erythromycin, spiramycin, virginiamycin, and 
oxytetracycline. The isolates from soil in public parks had also low MICs of 
these antimicrobial agents. Broth microdilution appeared both reliable and 
reproducible for susceptibility testing of C. difficile. The method was also 
readily performed and the MIC endpoints were easily read.

DOI: 10.1089/107662904323047817
PMID: 15140395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Gastroenterology. 1996 Aug;111(2):409-18. doi: 10.1053/gast.1996.v111.pm8690206.

Nitric oxide inhibits rat intestinal secretion by Clostridium difficile toxin A 
but not Vibrio cholerae enterotoxin.

Qiu B(1), Pothoulakis C, Castagliuolo I, Nikulasson Z, LaMont JT.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Boston University Medical Center Hospital, 
Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Intestinal inflammation is associated with increased 
synthesis of nitric oxide, whereas inhibition of NO synthase (NOS) reduces 
experimental chronic intestinal inflammation. The aim of this study was to test 
the effects of NO blockers and donors on acute intestinal inflammation induced 
by Clostridium difficile toxin A in rat ileum.
METHODS: Rats received NOS inhibitors or NO donors before measurement of 
toxin-mediated ileal secretion and permeability changes. Mucosal mast cell and 
neutrophil activity were measured by release of rat mast cell protease II and 
myeloperoxidase activity, respectively.
RESULTS: NOS inhibitors augmented but an NO donor inhibited toxin A-mediated 
ileal secretion and permeability when given before but not after toxin 
administration. Neither an NOS inhibitor nor an NO donor had any effect on 
cholera toxin-mediated secretion. Mast cell degranulation and neutrophil 
infiltration occurred after injection of toxin A or an NOS inhibitor, whereas 
the NO donor blocked both toxin A effects.
CONCLUSIONS: NOS inhibitors augmented and an NO donor blocked the intestinal 
effects of toxin A but not of cholera toxin. NO protects against toxin A by 
inhibition of intestinal mast cells and neutrophils, which are activated by 
toxin A, but not by cholera toxin.

DOI: 10.1053/gast.1996.v111.pm8690206
PMID: 8690206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Artif Intell Med. 2017 May;78:1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.05.003. Epub 2017 
May 9.

Modeling new immunoregulatory therapeutics as antimicrobial alternatives for 
treating Clostridium difficile infection.

Leber A(1), Hontecillas R(1), Abedi V(1), Tubau-Juni N(1), Zoccoli-Rodriguez 
V(1), Stewart C(1), Bassaganya-Riera J(2).

Author information:
(1)Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine Laboratory(1), Biocomplexity 
Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States.
(2)Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine Laboratory(1), Biocomplexity 
Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States. Electronic address: 
jbassaga@vt.edu.

The current treatment paradigm in Clostridium difficile infection is the 
administration of antibiotics contributing to the high rates of recurrent 
infections. Recent alternative strategies, such as fecal microbiome 
transplantation and anti-toxin antibodies, have shown similar efficacy in the 
treatment of C. difficile associated disease (CDAD). However, barriers exist for 
either treatment or other novel treatments to displace antibiotics as the 
standard of care. To aid in the comparison of these and future treatments in 
CDAD, we developed an in silico pipeline to predict clinical efficacy with 
nonclinical results. The pipeline combines an ordinary differential equation 
(ODE)-based model, describing the immunological and microbial interactions in 
the gastrointestinal (GI) mucosa, with machine learning algorithms to translate 
simulated output quantities (i.e. time of clearance, quantity of commensal 
bacteria, T cell ratios) into clinical predictions based on prior preclinical, 
translational and clinical trial data. As a use case, we compare the efficacy of 
lanthionine synthetase C-like 2 (LANCL2), a novel immunoregulatory target with 
promising efficacy in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), activation with 
antibiotics, fecal microbiome transplantation and anti-toxin antibodies in the 
treatment of CDAD. We further validate the potential of LANCL2 pathway 
activation, in a mouse model of C. difficile infection in which it displays an 
ability to decrease weight loss and inflammatory cell types while protecting 
against mortality. The computational pipeline can serve as an important resource 
in the development of new treatment modalities.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.05.003
PMID: 28764868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2008 Mar;52(2):207-18. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-695X.2007.00363.x. Epub 2007 Dec 15.

Active immunization of hamsters against Clostridium difficile infection using 
surface-layer protein.

Ní Eidhin DB(1), O'Brien JB, McCabe MS, Athié-Morales V, Kelleher DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine and Dublin Molecular Medicine Centre, Trinity 
College Dublin, Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, St James's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland. dniidhin@tcd.ie

Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of infectious antibiotic-associated 
diarrhoea, particularly among the elderly. Its surface-layer protein (SLP) was 
tested as a vaccine component in a series of immunization and challenge 
experiments with Golden Syrian hamsters, combined with different systemic and 
mucosal adjuvants. Some regimens were also tested in a nonchallenge BALB/c mouse 
model, enabling closer monitoring of the immune response. None of the regimens 
conferred complete protection in the hamster model, and antibody stimulation was 
variable within regimens, and generally modest or poor. Mice displayed stronger 
antibody responses to SLP compared with hamsters. Two hamsters of five given SLP 
with Ribi (monophosphoryl lipid A and synthetic trehalose dicorynomycolate) 
survived the challenge, as did two of three given SLP with Ribi and cholera 
toxin. This modest trend to protection is interpreted with caution, because the 
survivors had low anti-SLP serum antibody titres. The hamsters were an outbred 
line, and subject to more genetic variability than inbred animals; however, 
BALB/c mice also showed strongly variable antibody responses. There is a clear 
need for better adjuvants for single-component vaccines, particularly for 
mucosal delivery. The hamster challenge model may need to be modified to be 
useful in active immunization experiments with SLP.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2007.00363.x
PMID: 18093141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2011 May;66(5):1087-95. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkr033. Epub 
2011 Mar 3.

Activity of RBx 11760, a novel biaryl oxazolidinone, against Clostridium 
difficile.

Mathur T(1), Kumar M, Barman TK, Kumar GR, Kalia V, Singhal S, Raj VS, Upadhyay 
DJ, Das B, Bhatnagar PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, New Drug Discovery Research, Ranbaxy 
Research Laboratories, Gurgaon, Haryana, India. tarun.mathur.nz@dsin.co.in

OBJECTIVES: RBx 11760, a novel oxazolidinone, was investigated for in vitro and 
in vivo activity against Clostridium difficile.
METHODS: The in vitro activity of RBx 11760 and three other agents against 50 
diverse C. difficile clinical isolates and other obligate anaerobic bacteria was 
determined. The effect of RBx 11760 on sporulation and toxin production was 
determined against different C. difficile isolates. We used a hamster infection 
model to investigate the efficacy of RBx 11760, vancomycin and metronidazole. 
The mechanism of action of RBx 11760 against C. difficile ATCC 43255 was 
determined by macromolecular synthesis inhibition.
RESULTS: RBx 11760 MICs were in the range of 0.5-1 mg/L for C. difficile 
isolates, and it demonstrated concentration-dependent killing of C. difficile 
ATCC 43255 and C. difficile 6387 up to 2-4× MIC (1-2 mg/L). RBx 11760, at 
concentrations as low as 0.25-0.5 mg/L, resulted in a significant reduction in 
de novo toxin production as well as sporulation in different C. difficile 
isolates. In contrast, vancomycin, metronidazole and linezolid had little or no 
effect on toxin production and appeared to promote the formation of spores. In 
the hamster infection model, treatment with RBx 11760 resulted in prolonged 
survival of animals as compared with vancomycin or metronidazole, which 
correlated well with the histopathology results. Macromolecular labelling 
results suggest that RBx 11760 is a potent inhibitor of bacterial protein 
synthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: RBx 11760 showed excellent in vitro and in vivo activity against C. 
difficile, and it could be a promising novel candidate for future drug 
development against C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkr033
PMID: 21393140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Infect Immun. 2006 Nov;74(11):6339-47. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00982-06. Epub 2006 Sep 
11.

Human monoclonal antibodies directed against toxins A and B prevent Clostridium 
difficile-induced mortality in hamsters.

Babcock GJ(1), Broering TJ, Hernandez HJ, Mandell RB, Donahue K, Boatright N, 
Stack AM, Lowy I, Graziano R, Molrine D, Ambrosino DM, Thomas WD Jr.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts Biologic Laboratories, University of Massachusetts Medical 
School, 305 South St., Jamaica Plain, MA 02130, and Children's Hospital Boston, 
Division of Emergency Medicine 02115, USA.

Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of nosocomial antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea, and recent outbreaks of strains with increased virulence underscore 
the importance of identifying novel approaches to treat and prevent relapse of 
Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea (CDAD). CDAD pathology is induced by 
two exotoxins, toxin A and toxin B, which have been shown to be cytotoxic and, 
in the case of toxin A, enterotoxic. In this report we describe fully human 
monoclonal antibodies (HuMAbs) that neutralize these toxins and prevent disease 
in hamsters. Transgenic mice carrying human immunoglobulin genes were used to 
isolate HuMAbs that neutralize the cytotoxic effects of either toxin A or toxin 
B in cell-based in vitro neutralization assays. Three anti-toxin A HuMAbs (3H2, 
CDA1, and 1B11) could all inhibit the enterotoxicity of toxin A in mouse 
intestinal loops and the in vivo toxicity in a systemic mouse model. Four 
anti-toxin B HuMAbs (MDX-1388, 103-174, 1G10, and 2A11) could neutralize 
cytotoxicity in vitro, although systemic toxicity in the mouse could not be 
neutralized. Anti-toxin A HuMAb CDA1 and anti-toxin B HuMAb MDX-1388 were tested 
in the well-established hamster model of C. difficile disease. CDA1 alone 
resulted in a statistically significant reduction of mortality in hamsters; 
however, the combination treatment offered enhanced protection. Compared to 
controls, combination therapy reduced mortality from 100% to 45% (P<0.0001) in 
the primary disease hamster model and from 78% to 32% (P<0.0001) in the less 
stringent relapse model.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00982-06
PMCID: PMC1695490
PMID: 16966409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Vet Intern Med. 2005 Mar-Apr;19(2):177-86. doi: 
10.1892/0891-6640(2005)19<177:tcdid>2.0.co;2.

Tylosin-responsive chronic diarrhea in dogs.

Westermarck E(1), Skrzypczak T, Harmoinen J, Steiner JM, Ruaux CG, Williams DA, 
Eerola E, Sundbäck P, Rinkinen M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. elias.westermarck@helsinki.fi

Fourteen dogs had shown chronic or intermittent diarrhea for more than 1 year. 
Diarrhea had been successfully treated with tylosin for at least 6 months but 
recurred when treatment was withdrawn on at least 2 occasions. 
Tylosin-responsive diarrhea (TRD) affects typically middle-aged, large-breed 
dogs and clinical signs indicate that TRD affects both the small and large 
intestine. Treatment with tylosin eliminated diarrhea in all dogs within 3 days 
and in most dogs within 24 hours. Tylosin administration controlled diarrhea in 
all dogs, but after it was discontinued, diarrhea reappeared in 12 (85.7%) of 14 
dogs within 30 days. Prednisone given for 3 days did not completely resolve 
diarrhea. Probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG did not prevent the relapse of 
diarrhea in any of 9 dogs so treated. The etiology of TRD, a likely form of 
antibiotic-responsive diarrhea (ARD) is unclear. The following reasons for 
chronic diarrhea were excluded or found to be unlikely: parasites, exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency, inflammatory bowel disease, small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth, enteropathogenic bacteria (Salmonella spp., Campylobacter spp., 
Yersinia spp., or Lawsoni intracellularis), and Clostridium perfringens 
enterotoxin and Clostridium difficile A toxin. A possible etiologic factor is a 
specific enteropathogenic organism that is a common resident in the canine 
gastrointestinal tract and is sensitive to tylosin but difficult to eradicate. 
Additional studies are required to identify the specific cause of TRD.

DOI: 10.1892/0891-6640(2005)19<177:tcdid>2.0.co;2
PMID: 15822561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Med Microbiol. 2006 May;55(Pt 5):605-608. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.46334-0.

Potential role of Clostridium difficile as a cause of duodenitis-proximal 
jejunitis in horses.

Arroyo LG(1), Stämpfli HR(1), Weese JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, Canada, N1G 2WI.

Duodenitis-proximal jejunitis (DPJ) is an idiopathic condition in the horse 
characterized by inflammation and oedema of the duodenum and proximal jejunum. 
Clinical signs include colic, ileus, depression, fluid accumulation in the small 
intestine and stomach, and endotoxaemia. The objective of this study was to 
investigate prospectively the role of Clostridium difficile in this idiopathic 
disease. Nasogastric reflux from 10 consecutive cases with DPJ and 16 
consecutive horses with other causes of nasogastric reflux was cultured for C. 
difficile, other Clostridium spp., and Salmonella. Toxigenic strains of C. 
difficile were isolated from 10/10 (100%) of horses with DPJ and 1/16 controls 
(P<0.0001). No other known pathogenic clostridia were isolated from either 
group. Results of this study suggest that C. difficile might be an important 
cause of this syndrome.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.46334-0
PMID: 16585649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Vaccines Vaccin. 2016;7(3):321. doi: 10.4172/2157-7560.1000321. Epub 2016 May 
27.

Pilin Vaccination Stimulates Weak Antibody Responses and Provides No Protection 
in a C57Bl/6 Murine Model of Acute Clostridium difficile Infection.

Maldarelli GA(1), Matz H(1), Gao S(2), Chen K(2), Hamza T(2), Yfantis HG(3), 
Feng H(2), Donnenberg MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University of Maryland Dental School, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, VAMHCS, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of nosocomial infections in the 
United States, adding billions of dollars per year to health care costs. A 
vaccine targeted against the bacterium would be extremely beneficial in 
decreasing the morbidity and mortality caused by C. difficile-associated 
disease; a vaccine directed against a colonization factor would hinder the 
spread of the bacterium as well as prevent disease. Type IV pili (T4Ps) are 
extracellular appendages composed of protein monomers called pilins. They are 
involved in adhesion and colonization in a wide variety of bacteria and archaea, 
and are putative colonization factors in C. difficile. We hypothesized that 
vaccinating mice with pilins would lead to generation of anti-pilin antibodies, 
and would protect against C. difficile challenge. We found that immunizing 
C57Bl/6 mice with various pilins, whether combined or as individual proteins, 
led to low anti-pilin antibody titers and no protection upon C. difficile 
challenge. Passive transfer of anti-pilin antibodies led to high serum 
anti-pilin IgG titers, but to undetectable fecal anti-pilin IgG titers and did 
not protect against challenge. The low antibody titers observed in these 
experiments may be due to the particular strain of mice used. Further 
experiments, possibly with a different animal model of C. difficile infection, 
are needed to determine if an anti-T4P vaccine would be protective against C. 
difficile infection.

DOI: 10.4172/2157-7560.1000321
PMCID: PMC4927082
PMID: 27375958

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors report no 
financial conflicts of interest.


279. Infect Immun. 2018 Jul 23;86(8):e00326-18. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00326-18. Print 2018 
Aug.

Cysteine Desulfurase IscS2 Plays a Role in Oxygen Resistance in Clostridium 
difficile.

Giordano N(#)(1), Hastie JL(#)(1), Smith AD(1), Foss ED(1), Gutierrez-Munoz 
DF(1), Carlson PE Jr(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, Office of Vaccines 
Research and Review, Center for Biologics Evaluations and Research, Food and 
Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA.
(2)Division of Bacterial, Parasitic, and Allergenic Products, Office of Vaccines 
Research and Review, Center for Biologics Evaluations and Research, Food and 
Drug Administration, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA paul.carlson@fda.hhs.gov.
(#)Contributed equally

Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic, spore-forming bacterium capable of 
colonizing the gastrointestinal tract of humans following disruption of the 
normal microbiota, typically from antibiotic therapy for an unrelated infection. 
With approximately 500,000 confirmed infections leading to 29,000 deaths per 
year in the United States, C. difficile infection (CDI) is an urgent public 
health threat. We previously determined that C. difficile survives in up to 3% 
oxygen. Low levels of oxygen are present in the intestinal tract, with the 
higher concentrations being associated with the epithelial cell surface. 
Additionally, antibiotic treatment, the greatest risk factor for CDI, increases 
the intestinal oxygen concentration. Therefore, we hypothesized that the C. 
difficile genome encodes mechanisms for survival during oxidative stress. 
Previous data have shown that cysteine desulfurases involved in iron-sulfur 
cluster assembly are involved in protecting bacteria from oxidative stress. In 
this study, deletion of a putative cysteine desulfurase (Cd630_12790/IscS2) 
involved in the iron-sulfur cluster (Isc) system caused a severe growth defect 
in the presence of 2% oxygen. Additionally, this mutant delayed colonization in 
a conventional mouse model of CDI and failed to colonize in a germfree model, 
which has higher intestinal oxygen levels. These data imply an undefined role 
for this cysteine desulfurase in protecting C. difficile from low levels of 
oxygen in the gut.

This is a work of the U.S. Government and is not subject to copyright protection 
in the United States. Foreign copyrights may apply.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00326-18
PMCID: PMC6056869
PMID: 29866903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2016 Dec 20;6:191. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00191. 
eCollection 2016.

Functional Intestinal Bile Acid 7α-Dehydroxylation by Clostridium scindens 
Associated with Protection from Clostridium difficile Infection in a Gnotobiotic 
Mouse Model.

Studer N(1), Desharnais L(2), Beutler M(3), Brugiroux S(3), Terrazos MA(4), 
Menin L(5), Schürch CM(6), McCoy KD(7), Kuehne SA(8), Minton NP(8), Stecher 
B(9), Bernier-Latmani R(2), Hapfelmeier S(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of BernBern, Switzerland; 
Graduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of BernBern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Environmental Microbiology Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne (EPFL) Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Max von Pettenkofer Institute of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (LMU) Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne (EPFL) Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Pathology University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Maurice Müller Laboratories (DKF), Universitätsklinik für Viszerale Chirurgie 
und Medizin Inselspital, University of Bern Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Clostridia Research Group, Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research 
Council (BBSRC) and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC) Synthetic Biology Research Centre, School of Life Sciences, University 
of Nottingham Nottingham, UK.
(9)Max von Pettenkofer Institute of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (LMU)Munich, Germany; German Center for 
Infection Research, Deutsches Zentrum für Infektionsforschung (DZIF), Partner 
Site Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (LMU)Munich, Germany.

Bile acids, important mediators of lipid absorption, also act as hormone-like 
regulators and as antimicrobial molecules. In all these functions their potency 
is modulated by a variety of chemical modifications catalyzed by bacteria of the 
healthy gut microbiota, generating a complex variety of secondary bile acids. 
Intestinal commensal organisms are well-adapted to normal concentrations of bile 
acids in the gut. In contrast, physiological concentrations of the various 
intestinal bile acid species play an important role in the resistance to 
intestinal colonization by pathogens such as Clostridium difficile. Antibiotic 
therapy can perturb the gut microbiota and thereby impair the production of 
protective secondary bile acids. The most important bile acid transformation is 
7α-dehydroxylation, producing deoxycholic acid (DCA) and lithocholic acid (LCA). 
The enzymatic pathway carrying out 7α-dehydroxylation is restricted to a narrow 
phylogenetic group of commensal bacteria, the best-characterized of which is 
Clostridium scindens. Like many other intestinal commensal species, 
7-dehydroxylating bacteria are understudied in vivo. Conventional animals 
contain variable and uncharacterized indigenous 7α-dehydroxylating organisms 
that cannot be selectively removed, making controlled colonization with a 
specific strain in the context of an undisturbed microbiota unfeasible. In the 
present study, we used a recently established, standardized gnotobiotic mouse 
model that is stably associated with a simplified murine 12-species "oligo-mouse 
microbiota" (Oligo-MM12). It is representative of the major murine intestinal 
bacterial phyla, but is deficient for 7α-dehydroxylation. We find that the 
Oligo-MM12 consortium carries out bile acid deconjugation, a prerequisite for 
7α-dehydroxylation, and confers no resistance to C. difficile infection (CDI). 
Amendment of Oligo-MM12 with C. scindens normalized the large intestinal bile 
acid composition by reconstituting 7α-dehydroxylation. These changes had only 
minor effects on the composition of the native Oligo-MM12, but significantly 
decreased early large intestinal C. difficile colonization and pathogenesis. The 
delayed pathogenesis of C. difficile in C. scindens-colonized mice was 
associated with breakdown of cecal microbial bile acid transformation.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00191
PMCID: PMC5168579
PMID: 28066726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. ISME J. 2015 Feb;9(2):321-32. doi: 10.1038/ismej.2014.127. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

An in vitro culture model to study the dynamics of colonic microbiota in Syrian 
golden hamsters and their susceptibility to infection with Clostridium 
difficile.

Miezeiewski M(1), Schnaufer T(2), Muravsky M(2), Wang S(2), Caro-Aguilar I(2), 
Secore S(2), Thiriot DS(2), Hsu C(2), Rogers I(2), DeSantis T(3), Kuczynski 
J(3), Probst AJ(3), Chehoud C(3), Steger R(4), Warrington J(4), Bodmer JL(2), 
Heinrichs JH(2).

Author information:
(1)Eurofins Lancaster Laboratories Inc, Lancaster, PA, USA.
(2)Vaccine Research, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, PA, USA.
(3)Departments of Bioinformatics, Second Genome Inc, South San Francisco, CA, 
USA.
(4)Basic Research, Second Genome Inc, South San Francisco, CA, USA.

Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) are caused by colonization and growth of 
toxigenic strains of C. difficile in individuals whose intestinal microbiota has 
been perturbed, in most cases following antimicrobial therapy. Determination of 
the protective commensal gut community members could inform the development of 
treatments for CDI. Here, we utilized the lethal enterocolitis model in Syrian 
golden hamsters to analyze the microbiota disruption and recovery along a 20-day 
period following a single dose of clindamycin on day 0, inducing in vivo 
susceptibility to C. difficile infection. To determine susceptibility in vitro, 
spores of strain VPI 10463 were cultured with and without soluble hamster fecal 
filtrates and growth was quantified by quantitative PCR and toxin immunoassay. 
Fecal microbial population changes over time were tracked by 16S ribosomal RNA 
gene analysis via V4 sequencing and the PhyloChip assay. C. difficile culture 
growth and toxin production were inhibited by the presence of fecal extracts 
from untreated hamsters but not extracts collected 5 days post-administration of 
clindamycin. In vitro inhibition was re-established by day 15, which correlated 
with resistance of animals to lethal challenge. A substantial fecal microbiota 
shift in hamsters treated with antibiotics was observed, marked by significant 
changes across multiple phyla including Bacteroidetes and Proteobacteria. An 
incomplete return towards the baseline microbiome occurred by day 15 correlating 
with the inhibition of C. difficile growth in vitro and in vivo. These data 
suggest that soluble factors produced by the gut microbiota may be responsible 
for the suppression of C. difficile growth and toxin production.

DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2014.127
PMCID: PMC4303626
PMID: 25036923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Dec;58(12):7560-4. doi: 10.1128/AAC.03447-14. 
Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Beneficial effect of oral tigecycline treatment on Clostridium difficile 
infection in gnotobiotic piglets.

Kim HB(1), Zhang Q(2), Sun X(2), Beamer G(2), Wang Y(2), Tzipori S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease and Global Health, Tufts University, North 
Grafton, Massachusetts, USA Department of Animal Resource and Science, Dankook 
University, Cheonan, Choongnam, South Korea.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease and Global Health, Tufts University, North 
Grafton, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Infectious Disease and Global Health, Tufts University, North 
Grafton, Massachusetts, USA Saul.Tzipori@tufts.edu.

The efficacy of oral tigecycline treatment (2 mg/kg of body weight for 7 days) 
of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) was evaluated in the gnotobiotic pig 
model, and its effect on human gut microflora transplanted into the gnotobiotic 
pig was determined. Tigecycline oral treatment improved survival, clinical 
signs, and lesion severity and markedly decreased concentrations of Firmicutes 
but did not promote CDI. Our data showed that oral tigecycline treatment has a 
potential beneficial effect on the treatment of CDI.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.03447-14
PMCID: PMC4249528
PMID: 25267665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Bacteriol. 2014 Jun;196(12):2290-300. doi: 10.1128/JB.00038-14. Epub 2014 Apr 
11.

Identification and characterization of a gene cluster required for proper rod 
shape, cell division, and pathogenesis in Clostridium difficile.

Ransom EM(1), Williams KB(1), Weiss DS(2), Ellermeier CD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA 
david-weiss@uiowa.edu craig-ellermeier@uiowa.edu.

Little is known about cell division in Clostridium difficile, a strict anaerobe 
that causes serious diarrheal diseases in people whose normal intestinal 
microbiome has been perturbed by treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Here 
we identify and characterize a gene cluster encoding three cell division 
proteins found only in C. difficile and a small number of closely related 
bacteria. These proteins were named MldA, MldB, and MldC, for midcell localizing 
division proteins. MldA is predicted to be a membrane protein with coiled-coil 
domains and a peptidoglycan-binding SPOR domain. MldB and MldC are predicted to 
be cytoplasmic proteins; MldB has two predicted coiled-coil domains, but MldC 
lacks obvious conserved domains or sequence motifs. Mutants of mldA or mldB had 
morphological defects, including loss of rod shape (a curved cell phenotype) and 
inefficient separation of daughter cells (a chaining phenotype). Fusions of cyan 
fluorescent protein (CFP) to MldA, MldB, and MldC revealed that all three 
proteins localize sharply to the division site. This application of CFP was 
possible because we discovered that O2-dependent fluorescent proteins produced 
anaerobically can acquire fluorescence after cells are fixed with cross-linkers 
to preserve native patterns of protein localization. Mutants lacking the Mld 
proteins are severely attenuated for pathogenesis in a hamster model of C. 
difficile infection. Because all three Mld proteins are essentially unique to C. 
difficile, they might be exploited as targets for antibiotics that combat C. 
difficile without disrupting the intestinal microbiome.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00038-14
PMCID: PMC4054185
PMID: 24727226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Carbohydr Res. 2013 Aug 30;378:15-25. doi: 10.1016/j.carres.2013.03.018. Epub 
2013 Mar 30.

Clostridium difficile PSI polysaccharide: synthesis of pentasaccharide repeating 
block, conjugation to exotoxin B subunit, and detection of natural anti-PSI IgG 
antibodies in horse serum.

Jiao Y(1), Ma Z, Hodgins D, Pequegnat B, Bertolo L, Arroyo L, Monteiro MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada.

Clostridium difficile is the most common cause of antimicrobial-associated 
diarrhea in humans and may cause death. Previously, we discovered that C. 
difficile expresses three polysaccharides, named PSI, PSII, and PSIII. It has 
now been established that PSII is a conserved antigen abundantly present on the 
cell-surface and biofilm of C. difficile. In contrast, the expression of PSI and 
PSIII appears to be stochastic processes. In this work, the total chemical 
synthesis of the PSI pentasaccharide repeating unit carrying a linker at the 
reducing end, 
α-l-Rhap-(1→3)-β-d-Glcp-(1→4)-[α-l-Rhap-(1→3)]-α-d-Glcp-(1→2)-α-d-Glcp-(1→O(CH2)5NH2, 
was achieved by a linear synthesis strategy from four monosaccharide building 
blocks. The synthesized PSI pentasaccharide was conjugated to a subunit of C. 
difficile exotoxin B yielding a potential dual C. difficile vaccine. More 
significantly, sera from healthy horses were shown to contain natural anti-PSI 
IgG antibodies that detected both the synthetic non-phosphorylated PSI repeat 
and the native PSI polysaccharide, with a slightly higher recognition of the 
native PSI polysaccharide.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carres.2013.03.018
PMID: 23597587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Infect Immun. 1998 May;66(5):2018-25. doi: 10.1128/IAI.66.5.2018-2025.1998.

Antibodies to recombinant Clostridium difficile toxins A and B are an effective 
treatment and prevent relapse of C. difficile-associated disease in a hamster 
model of infection.

Kink JA(1), Williams JA.

Author information:
(1)Ophidian Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Madison, Wisconsin 53711, USA. 
ophidian@ophd.com

Clostridium difficile causes antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis in 
humans through the actions of toxin A and toxin B on the colonic mucosa. At 
present, broad-spectrum antibiotic drugs are used to treat this disease, and 
patients suffer from high relapse rates after termination of treatment. This 
study examined the role of both toxins in pathogenesis and the ability of orally 
administered avian antibodies against recombinant epitopes of toxin A and toxin 
B to treat C. difficile-associated disease (CDAD). DNA fragments representing 
the entire gene of each toxin were cloned, expressed, and affinity purified. 
Hens were immunized with these purified recombinant-protein fragments of toxin A 
and toxin B. Toxin-neutralizing antibodies fractionated from egg yolks were 
evaluated by a toxin neutralization assay in Syrian hamsters. The 
carboxy-terminal region of each toxin was most effective in generating 
toxin-neutralizing antibodies. With a hamster infection model, antibodies to 
both toxins A and B (CDAD antitoxin) were required to prevent morbidity and 
mortality from infection. In contrast to vancomycin, CDAD antitoxin prevented 
relapse and subsequent C. difficile reinfection in the hamsters. These results 
indicate that CDAD antitoxin may be effective in the treatment and management of 
CDAD in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.66.5.2018-2025.1998
PMCID: PMC108158
PMID: 9573084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nat Commun. 2018 Sep 10;9(1):3663. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-06103-6.

Gut fungal dysbiosis correlates with reduced efficacy of fecal microbiota 
transplantation in Clostridium difficile infection.

Zuo T(1)(2), Wong SH(1)(2)(3), Cheung CP(1), Lam K(1), Lui R(1), Cheung K(1), 
Zhang F(4), Tang W(1), Ching JYL(1), Wu JCY(1)(2), Chan PKS(3)(5), Sung 
JJY(1)(2), Yu J(1)(2)(3), Chan FKL(1)(2)(3), Ng SC(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.
(2)Institute of Digestive Disease, State Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, 
LKS Institute of Health Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.
(3)Center for Gut Microbiota Research, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China.
(4)Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 
China.
(5)Department of Microbiology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China.
(6)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China. siewchienng@cuhk.edu.hk.
(7)Institute of Digestive Disease, State Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, 
LKS Institute of Health Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
China. siewchienng@cuhk.edu.hk.
(8)Center for Gut Microbiota Research, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, China. siewchienng@cuhk.edu.hk.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is effective in treating recurrent 
Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). Bacterial colonization in recipients 
after FMT has been studied, but little is known about the role of the gut fungal 
community, or mycobiota. Here, we show evidence of gut fungal dysbiosis in CDI, 
and that donor-derived fungal colonization in recipients is associated with FMT 
response. CDI is accompanied by over-representation of Candida albicans and 
decreased fungal diversity, richness, and evenness. Cure after FMT is associated 
with increased colonization of donor-derived fungal taxa in recipients. 
Recipients of successful FMT ("responders") display, after FMT, a high relative 
abundance of Saccharomyces and Aspergillus, whereas "nonresponders" and 
individuals treated with antibiotics display a dominant presence of Candida. 
High abundance of C. albicans in donor stool also correlates with reduced FMT 
efficacy. Furthermore, C. albicans reduces FMT efficacy in a mouse model of CDI, 
while antifungal treatment reestablishes its efficacy, supporting a potential 
causal relationship between gut fungal dysbiosis and FMT outcome.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-06103-6
PMCID: PMC6131390
PMID: 30202057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


287. Curr Opin Microbiol. 2013 Jun;16(3):240-5. doi: 10.1016/j.mib.2013.06.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 8.

The adoptive transfer of behavioral phenotype via the intestinal microbiota: 
experimental evidence and clinical implications.

Collins SM(1), Kassam Z, Bercik P.

Author information:
(1)Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute, Department of Medicine, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. 
scollins@mcmaster.ca

There is growing interest in the ability of the intestinal microbiome to 
influence host function within and beyond the gastrointestinal tract. Here we 
review evidence of microbiome-brain interactions in mice and focus on the 
ability to transfer behavioral traits between mouse strains using fecal 
microbiota transplantation (FMT). Transplantation alters brain chemistry and 
behavior in recipient ex-germ free mice, raising the possibility of using FMT 
for disorders of the central nervous system, and prompting caution in the 
selection of FMT donors for conditions that may include refractory Clostridium 
difficile infection, diabetes and inflammatory bowel disease in humans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mib.2013.06.004
PMID: 23845749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Infect Immun. 2014 Oct;82(10):4222-32. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02336-14. Epub 2014 Jul 
21.

The HtrA-like protease CD3284 modulates virulence of Clostridium difficile.

Bakker D(1), Buckley AM(2), de Jong A(3), van Winden VJ(1), Verhoeks JP(1), 
Kuipers OP(3), Douce GR(2), Kuijper EJ(1), Smits WK(4), Corver J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Section Experimental Bacteriology, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, Section Experimental Bacteriology, Leiden 
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands W.K.Smits@LUMC.nl 
J.corver@LUMC.nl.

In the past decade, Clostridium difficile has emerged as an important gut 
pathogen. Symptoms of C. difficile infection range from mild diarrhea to 
pseudomembranous colitis. Besides the two main virulence factors toxin A and 
toxin B, other virulence factors are likely to play a role in the pathogenesis 
of the disease. In other Gram-positive and Gram-negative pathogenic bacteria, 
conserved high-temperature requirement A (HtrA)-like proteases have been shown 
to have a role in protein homeostasis and quality control. This affects the 
functionality of virulence factors and the resistance of bacteria to 
(host-induced) environmental stresses. We found that the C. difficile 630 genome 
encodes a single HtrA-like protease (CD3284; HtrA) and have analyzed its role in 
vivo and in vitro through the creation of an isogenic ClosTron-based htrA mutant 
of C. difficile strain 630Δerm (wild type). In contrast to the attenuated 
phenotype seen with htrA deletion in other pathogens, this mutant showed 
enhanced virulence in the Golden Syrian hamster model of acute C. difficile 
infection. Microarray data analysis showed a pleiotropic effect of htrA on the 
transcriptome of C. difficile, including upregulation of the toxin A gene. In 
addition, the htrA mutant showed reduced spore formation and adherence to 
colonic cells. Together, our data show that htrA can modulate virulence in C. 
difficile.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02336-14
PMCID: PMC4187886
PMID: 25047848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Gastroenterology. 1986 Nov;91(5):1147-53. doi: 10.1016/s0016-5085(86)80010-5.

Clostridium difficile cytotoxin inhibits protein synthesis in fibroblasts and 
intestinal mucosa.

Pothoulakis C, Triadafilopoulos G, Clark M, Franzblau C, LaMont JT.

The pathophysiology of Clostridium difficile colitis is thought to be mediated 
by release of toxin A, an enterotoxin, and toxin B, a cytotoxin. We compared the 
differential effects of toxin B on protein synthesis in IMR-90 fibroblasts and 
in hamster esophagus, stomach, gallbladder, small intestine, and cecum in organ 
culture. Toxin B in low concentrations stimulated (p less than 0.001) 
incorporation of [3H]leucine into fibroblast proteins, whereas at higher dosages 
it inhibited incorporation (p less than 0.001). This biphasic effect was 
independent of cell rounding and was not caused by a change in uptake of 
precursor. Purified toxin B had no effect on protein synthesis in a cell-free 
rabbit reticulocyte translation system, indicating that inhibition of protein 
synthesis in intact fibroblast monolayers and intestinal explants is a 
consequence of toxin B effect on some other cellular target. Toxin B 
significantly inhibited protein synthesis in hamster cecal explants in a 
dose-dependent fashion. Again, this inhibition was not mediated by altered 
precursor uptake. Toxin B significantly inhibited in vitro protein synthesis in 
hamster terminal ileum, cecum, and sigmoid colon, but not in esophagus, 
gallbladder, stomach, or duodenum. These results suggest that toxin B-mediated 
inhibition of protein synthesis may be a generalized toxic effect in tissue 
culture cells and intestinal epithelium. Inhibition of protein synthesis in the 
distal intestinal epithelium may contribute to the pathophysiology of colitis 
caused by this organism.

DOI: 10.1016/s0016-5085(86)80010-5
PMID: 3758606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Med Microbiol. 1998 Jul;47(7):591-8. doi: 10.1099/00222615-47-7-591.

Bacterial translocation, intestinal microflora and morphological changes of 
intestinal mucosa in experimental models of Clostridium difficile infection.

Naaber P(1), Mikelsaar RH, Salminen S, Mikelsaar M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Tartu, Finland.

Bacteraemia and subsequent sepsis is one possible complication of Clostridium 
difficile infection. The aim of this study was to examine a correlation between 
bacterial translocation with morphological changes of intestinal mucosa and 
shifts of intestinal microflora in experimental models of C. difficile 
infection. A mouse model was used to study post-antibiotic shifts and mild C. 
difficile infection, and hamsters were used to study fatal enterocolitis. The 
influence of pro- and pre-biotics (lactobacilli and xylitol) were also studied 
in the hamster model. The quantitative composition of luminal and mucosal 
microflora was evaluated in different intestinal loci, inflammatory changes of 
mucosa were estimated in histological sections and bacterial translocation was 
detected in samples from blood, liver, spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes. In 
cases of mild C. difficile infection, the extent of disturbance of intestinal 
microflora appeared to be a more important promoting factor in translocation 
than inflammatory activity in the mucosa. Translocation was frequent in fatal 
enterocolitis, with facultative species predominating in the intestinal mucosa 
and also C. difficile in some cases. The combination of lactobacilli and xylitol 
had some protective effect against C. difficile infection in these models.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-47-7-591
PMID: 9839563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. AAPS PharmSciTech. 2017 May;18(4):1095-1103. doi: 10.1208/s12249-016-0656-2. 
Epub 2016 Nov 8.

Colon-Targeted Delivery of IgY Against Clostridium difficile Toxin A and B by 
Encapsulation in Chitosan-Ca Pectinate Microbeads.

Xing P(1), Shi Y(2), Dong C(3), Liu H(3), Cheng Y(3), Sun J(3), Li D(3), Li 
M(3), Sun K(4), Feng D(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Drug Delivery 
System and Biotech Drugs in Universities of Shandong, Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Pharmacology and Drug Evaluation, Ministry of Education, Yantai 
University, Yantai, 264005, China.
(2)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong Binzhou Medical University, 
Yantai, 264003, China.
(3)Shandong Luye Pharmaceutical Company, Yantai, 264003, China.
(4)School of Pharmacy, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Drug Delivery 
System and Biotech Drugs in Universities of Shandong, Key Laboratory of 
Molecular Pharmacology and Drug Evaluation, Ministry of Education, Yantai 
University, Yantai, 264005, China. sunkx@ytu.edu.cn.
(5)Shandong Luye Pharmaceutical Company, Yantai, 264003, China. 
fengdx@hotmail.com.
(6)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shandong Binzhou Medical University, 
Yantai, 264003, China. fengdx@hotmail.com.

This study investigated the use of a newly developed chitosan-Ca pectinate 
microbead formulation for the colon-targeted delivery of anti-A/B toxin 
immunoglobulin of egg yolk (IgY) to inhibit toxin binding to colon mucosa cells. 
The effect of the three components (pectinate, calcium chloride, and chitosan) 
used for the microbead production was examined with the aim of identifying the 
optimal levels to improve drug encapsulation efficiency, swelling ratio, and 
cumulative IgY release rate. The optimized IgY-loaded bead component was pectin 
5% (w/v), CaCl2 3% (w/v), and chitosan 0.5% (w/v). Formulated beads were 
spherical with 1.2-mm diameter, and the drug loading was 45%. An in vitro 
release study revealed that chitosan-Ca pectinate microbeads inhibited IgY 
release in the upper gastrointestinal tract and significantly improved the 
site-specific release of IgY in the colon. An in vivo rat study demonstrated 
that 72.6% of biologically active IgY was released specifically in the colon. 
These results demonstrated that anti-A/B toxin IgY-loaded chitosan-Ca pectinate 
oral microbeads improved IgY release behavior in vivo, which could be used as an 
effective oral delivery platform for the biological treatment of Clostridium 
difficile infection (CDI).

DOI: 10.1208/s12249-016-0656-2
PMID: 27826799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Hosp Infect. 2006 Apr;62(4):458-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jhin.2005.09.025. Epub 2006 
Feb 7.

Prevalence of zoonotic agents in dogs visiting hospitalized people in Ontario: 
implications for infection control.

Lefebvre SL(1), Waltner-Toews D, Peregrine AS, Reid-Smith R, Hodge L, Arroyo LG, 
Weese JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, 
Canada. slefebvr@uoguelph.ca

Visitation of hospitalized people by dogs is becoming commonplace, but little is 
known about the potential health risks of introducing dogs to healthcare 
settings. This cross-sectional study evaluated the prevalence of zoonotic agents 
in a group of 102 visitation dogs from a variety of sources across Ontario. 
Between May and July 2004, owners were interviewed by a standardized 
questionnaire while dogs underwent a standardized physical examination. One 
specimen of faeces, hair-coat brushings and one rectal, aural, nasal, oral and 
pharyngeal swab were collected from each dog and tested for 18 specific 
pathogens. All dogs were judged to be in good health. Zoonotic agents were 
isolated from 80 out of 102 (80%) dogs. The primary pathogen was Clostridium 
difficile, which was isolated from 58 (58%) faecal specimens. Seventy-one 
percent (41/58) of these isolates were toxigenic. Extended-spectrum 
beta-lactamase Escherichia coli was isolated from one (1%) dog, 
extended-spectrum cephalosporinase E. coli was isolated from three (3%) dogs, 
and organisms of the genus Salmonella were isolated from three (3%) dogs. 
Pasteurella multocida or Pasteurella canis was isolated from 29 (29%) oral 
swabs, and Malassezia pachydermatis was isolated from eight (8%) aural swabs. 
Giardia antigen was present in the faeces of seven (7%) dogs, while Toxocara 
canis and Ancylostoma caninum were detected in two (2%) dogs and one (1%) dog, 
respectively. Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci, Campylobacter spp., Microsporum canis, group A streptococci, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Cryptosporidium spp. were not detected. Further 
information is needed before the full implications of these findings for 
infection control can be assessed properly.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhin.2005.09.025
PMID: 16466831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Med Microbiol. 2011 Aug;60(Pt 8):1174-1180. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.028514-0. Epub 
2011 Feb 17.

Infection of hamsters with the UK Clostridium difficile ribotype 027 outbreak 
strain R20291.

Buckley AM(1), Spencer J(1), Candlish D(1), Irvine JJ(1), Douce GR(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology, Infection and Inflammation, Glasgow Biomedical 
Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.

Clostridium difficile is the main cause of antibiotic-associated disease, a 
disease of high socio-economical importance that has recently been compounded by 
the global spread of the 027 (BI/NAP1/027) ribotype. C. difficile cases 
attributed to ribotype 027 strains have high recurrence rates (up to 36 %) and 
increased disease severity. The hamster model of infection is widely accepted as 
an appropriate model for studying aspects of C. difficile host-pathogen 
interactions. Using this model we characterized the infection kinetics of the UK 
2006 outbreak strain, R20291. Hamsters were orally given a dose of clindamycin, 
followed 5 days later with 10, 000 C. difficile spores. All 100 % of the 
hamsters succumbed to infection with a mean time to the clinical end point of 
46.7 h. Colonization of the caecum and colon were observed 12 h post-infection 
reaching a maximum of approximately 3×10(4) c.f.u. per organ, but spores were 
not detected until 24 h post-infection. At 36 h post-infection C. difficile 
numbers increased significantly to approximately 6×10(7) c.f.u. per organ where 
numbers remained high until the clinical end point. Increasing levels of in vivo 
toxin production coincided with increases in C. difficile numbers in organs 
reaching a maximum at 36 h post-infection in the caecum. Epithelial destruction 
and polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) recruitment occurred early on during 
infection (24 h) accumulating as gross microvilli damage, luminal PMN influx, 
and blood associated with mucosal muscle and microvilli. These data describe the 
fatal infection kinetics of the clinical UK epidemic C. difficile strain R20291 
in the hamster infection model.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.028514-0
PMCID: PMC3167879
PMID: 21330415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2013 Mar;20(3):377-90. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00625-12. Epub 
2013 Jan 16.

A mixture of functionally oligoclonal humanized monoclonal antibodies that 
neutralize Clostridium difficile TcdA and TcdB with high levels of in vitro 
potency shows in vivo protection in a hamster infection model.

Davies NL(1), Compson JE, Mackenzie B, O'Dowd VL, Oxbrow AK, Heads JT, Turner A, 
Sarkar K, Dugdale SL, Jairaj M, Christodoulou L, Knight DE, Cross AS, Hervé KJ, 
Tyson KL, Hailu H, Doyle CB, Ellis M, Kriek M, Cox M, Page MJ, Moore AR, 
Lightwood DJ, Humphreys DP.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Biology, UCB Pharma Slough, Slough, Berkshire, United Kingdom.

Clostridium difficile infections are a major cause of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea in hospital and care facility patients. In spite of the availability of 
effective antibiotic treatments, C. difficile infection (CDI) is still a major 
cause of patient suffering, death, and substantial health care costs. 
Clostridium difficile exerts its major pathological effects through the actions 
of two protein exotoxins, TcdA and TcdB, which bind to and disrupt gut tissue. 
Antibiotics target the infecting bacteria but not the exotoxins. Administering 
neutralizing antibodies against TcdA and TcdB to patients receiving antibiotic 
treatment might modulate the effects of the exotoxins directly. We have 
developed a mixture of three humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) which 
neutralize TcdA and TcdB to address three clinical needs: reduction of the 
severity and duration of diarrhea, reduction of death rates, and reduction of 
the rate of recurrence. The UCB MAb mixture showed higher potency in a variety 
of in vitro binding and neutralization assays (∼10-fold improvements), higher 
levels of protection in a hamster model of CDI (82% versus 18% at 28 days), and 
higher valencies of toxin binding (12 versus 2 for TcdA and 3 versus 2 for TcdB) 
than other agents in clinical development. Comparisons of the MAb properties 
also offered some insight into the potential relative importance of TcdA and 
TcdB in the disease process.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00625-12
PMCID: PMC3592348
PMID: 23324518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Epidemiol Infect. 1993 Oct;111(2):257-64. doi: 10.1017/s095026880005696x.

A molecular characterization of Clostridium difficile isolates from humans, 
animals and their environments.

O'Neill G(1), Adams JE, Bowman RA, Riley TV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Western Australia, Nedlands.

It is generally accepted that most patients with Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhoea acquire the organism from the environment. 
Recently we demonstrated that household pets may constitute a significant 
reservoir of C. difficile through gastrointestinal carriage in up to 39% of cats 
and dogs. These findings suggested that direct transmission from household pets, 
or contamination of the environment by them, may be a factor in the pathogenesis 
of C. difficile-associated diarrhoea. To investigate this possibility, we 
examined isolates of C. difficile from humans, pets and the environment by 
restriction enzyme analysis (REA) and restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP) typing using enhanced chemiluminescence. Both REA and RFLP typing methods 
used Hind III digests of chromosomal DNA. A total of 116 isolates of C. 
difficile from pets (26), veterinary clinic environmental sites (33), humans 
(37) and hospital environmental sites (20) was examined. REA was far more 
discriminatory than RFLP typing and for all isolates there were 34 REA types 
versus 6 RFLP types. There was good correlation between the REA types found in 
isolates from pets and from the veterinary clinic environment, and between 
isolates from humans and from those found in the hospital environment. There 
was, however, no correlation between REA type of C. difficile found in pets and 
isolates of human origin. We conclude that there may still be a risk of humans 
acquiring C. difficile from domestic pets as these findings may be the result of 
geographical variation.

DOI: 10.1017/s095026880005696x
PMCID: PMC2271396
PMID: 8104816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2014 Nov;46(11):973-81. doi: 
10.1093/abbs/gmu091. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Recombinant Clostridium difficile toxin B induces endoplasmic reticulum stress 
in mouse colonal carcinoma cells.

Sun C(1), Wang H(2), Chen S(1), Li Z(1), Li S(3), Wang J(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(2)School of Light Industry and Food Sciences, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(3)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China School of Light Industry and Food Sciences, 
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.
(4)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China jufwang@scut.edu.cn.

Clostridium difficile is the main cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea and 
pseudomembranous colitis in humans and animals. Its pathogenicity is primarily 
linked to the secretion of two exotoxins (TcdA and TcdB). Although great 
progress in the toxic mechanism of TcdA and TcdB has been achieved, there are 
many conflicting reports about the apoptotic mechanism. More importantly, 
apoptotic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress has been reported in cells treated 
with Shiga toxins-another kind of cytotoxins that can cause diarrhea and 
colitis. Herein we checked whether TcdB can induce ER stress. The results showed 
that recombinant TcdB (rTcdB) activated molecular markers of unfolded protein 
response, suggesting that rTcdB induced ER stress in CT26 cells. However, rTcdB 
did not induce the up-regulation of C/EBP homologous protein (CHOP), a classic 
mediator of apoptotic ER stress, but it activated the precursor of cysteine 
aspartic acid-specific protease 12 (caspase-12), a controversial mediator of 
apoptotic ER stress. Besides, glucosyltransferase activity-deficient mutant 
recombinant TcdB induced ER stress, though it has no cytotoxic or cytopathic 
effect on CT26 cells. Altogether, these data demonstrated that ER stress induced 
by rTcdB is glucosyltransferase-independent, indicating that ER stress induced 
by rTcdB is non-apoptotic. This work also offers us a new insight into the 
molecular mechanism of CHOP protein expression regulation and the role of CHOP 
expression in ER stress.

© The Author 2014. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, 
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1093/abbs/gmu091
PMID: 25274332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. PLoS One. 2014 May 19;9(5):e96876. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096876. 
eCollection 2014.

The flagellin FliC of Clostridium difficile is responsible for pleiotropic gene 
regulation during in vivo infection.

Barketi-Klai A(1), Monot M(2), Hoys S(1), Lambert-Bordes S(1), Kuehne SA(3), 
Minton N(3), Collignon A(2), Dupuy B(2), Kansau I(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Pharmacie, EA4043, Université Paris Sud, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(2)Laboratoire Pathogenèse des Bactéries Anaérobies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.
(3)Clostridia Research Group, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, School of Life 
Sciences, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Clostridium difficile is the main agent responsible for hospital acquired 
antibiotic associated diarrhoea. In recent years, epidemic strains have emerged 
causing more severe infections. Whilst C. difficile has two major virulence 
factors, toxins TcdA and TcdB, it is generally accepted that other virulence 
components of the bacterium contribute to disease. Previously, it has been 
suggested that flagella expression from pathogenic bacteria might be implicated 
in virulence. In a recent study, we observed an increased mortality in a 
gnotobiotic mouse model when animals were colonized with an isogenic fliC mutant 
constructed in the PCR-ribotype 027 (B1/NAP1) strain R20291, while animals 
survived when colonized by the parental strain or after colonization by other 
high-toxin-producing C. difficile strains. To understand the reasons for this 
increased virulence, we compared the global gene expression profiles between the 
fliC-R20291 mutant and its parental strain using an in vitro and in vivo 
transcriptomic approach. The latter made use of the gnotobiotic mouse model. 
Interestingly, in the fliC mutant, we observed considerable up-regulation of 
genes involved in mobility, membrane transport systems (PTS, ABC transporters), 
carbon metabolism, known virulence factors and sporulation. A smaller but 
significant up-regulation of genes involved in cell growth, fermentation, 
metabolism, stress and antibiotic resistance was also apparent. All of these 
genes may be associated with the increased virulence of the fliC-R20921 mutant. 
We confirmed that the fliC mutation is solely responsible for the observed 
changes in gene expression in the mutant strain since expression profiles were 
restored to that of the wild-type strain in the fliC-complemented strain. Thus, 
the absence of FliC is directly or indirectly involved in the high mortality 
observed in the fliC mutant infected animals. Therefore, we provide the first 
evidence that when the major structural component of the flagellum is 
neutralized, deregulation of gene expression can occur during infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096876
PMCID: PMC4026244
PMID: 24841151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


298. J Med Microbiol. 2008 Jun;57(Pt 6):790-792. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.47669-0.

Isolation of Clostridium difficile from food animals in Slovenia.

Pirs T(1), Ocepek M(1), Rupnik M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Faculty, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(2)Medical Faculty, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.
(3)Centre for Microbiology, Institute for Public Health Maribor, Prvomajska 1, 
2000 Maribor, Slovenia.

A total of 313 faecal samples from three pig farms and two cattle farms was 
collected, and Clostridium difficile was isolated from 133/257 piglet samples 
(51.8%) and from 1/56 calf samples (1.8%). Toxins were tested only in calf 
samples and were positive in 44.6% (25/56). The only bovine isolate belonged to 
toxinotype XIa (A(-)B(-)CDT(+)). Porcine isolates belonged to toxinotype 0 
(A(+)B(+)CDT(-)) and toxinotype V (A(+)B(+)CDT(+)). Of the two ribotypes usually 
found in toxinotype V, the strains isolated in this study showed a greater 
similarity to ribotype 066 than to ribotype 078.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.47669-0
PMID: 18480339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2008 Apr;10(4):679-89. doi: 10.1089/ars.2007.1521.

Rac and PI3 kinase mediate endothelial cell-reactive oxygen species generation 
during normoxic lung ischemia.

Zhang Q(1), Chatterjee S, Wei Z, Liu WD, Fisher AB.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Environmental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Medical 
Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6068, USA.

Abrupt reduction of flow (ischemia) leads to endothelial cell membrane 
depolarization, NADPH oxidase activation, and reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
generation in isolated rat and mouse lungs and in flow-adapted endothelial cells 
in vitro. Here we evaluated the role of PI-3-kinase and rac in activation of 
endothelial NADPH oxidase. Endothelium of isolated perfused mouse lungs labeled 
with 2',7'-dichlorodihydrofluorescein (H(2)DCF) or hydroethidine (HE) showed 
increased ROS generation with ischemia; these results were supported by TBARS 
measurement in whole-lung homogenate and by in vitro studies using flow-adapted 
mouse pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells. Ischemia-induced ROS generation 
in intact lung or isolated cells was blocked by pretreatment with Clostridium 
difficile toxin B, a rac inhibitor, and by wortmannin or LY294002, PI3 kinase 
inhibitors. In cells, immunofluorescence and immunoblot after subcellular 
fractionation showed ischemia-induced translocation of rac, p47(phox), and 
p67(phox) to the plasma membrane. Increased extracellular K(+) also resulted in 
rac translocation, providing evidence that this pathway is sensitive to 
alterations of endothelial cell membrane potential. These results indicate that 
PI-3-kinase and the small G protein rac are involved in the activation of 
endothelial cell NADPH oxidase that is associated with the acute loss of shear 
stress.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2007.1521
PMID: 18162054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Infect Immun. 2011 Aug;79(8):3229-38. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00019-11. Epub 2011 May 
31.

PrsW is required for colonization, resistance to antimicrobial peptides, and 
expression of extracytoplasmic function σ factors in Clostridium difficile.

Ho TD(1), Ellermeier CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, 51 Newton Rd., Iowa City, IA 
52242, USA.

Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming, 
opportunistic pathogen that is the most common cause of hospital-acquired 
infectious diarrhea. In numerous pathogens, stress response mechanisms are 
required for survival within the host. Extracytoplasmic function (ECF) σ factors 
are a major family of signal transduction systems, which sense and respond to 
extracellular stresses. We have identified three C. difficile ECF σ factors. 
These ECF σ factors, CsfT, CsfU, and CsfV, induce their own expressions and are 
negatively regulated by their cognate anti-σ factors, RsiT, RsiU, and RsiV, 
respectively. The levels of expression of these ECF σ factors increase following 
exposure to the antimicrobial peptides bacitracin and/or lysozyme. The 
expressions of many ECF σ factors are controlled by site 1 and site 2 proteases, 
which cleave anti-σ factors. Using a retargeted group II intron, we generated a 
C. difficile mutation in prsW, a putative site 1 protease. The C. difficile prsW 
mutant exhibited decreased levels of expression of CsfT and CsfU but not of 
CsfV. When expressed in a heterologous host, C. difficile PrsW was able to 
induce the degradation of RsiT but not of RsiU. When the prsW mutant was tested 
in competition assays against its isogenic parent in the hamster model of C. 
difficile infection, we found that the prsW mutant was 30-fold less virulent 
than the wild type. The prsW mutant was also significantly more sensitive to 
bacitracin and lysozyme than the wild type in in vitro competition assays. Taken 
together, these data suggest that PrsW likely regulates the activation of the 
ECF σ factor CsfT in C. difficile and controls the resistance of C. difficile to 
antimicrobial peptides that are important for survival in the host.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00019-11
PMCID: PMC3147581
PMID: 21628514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2006 Mar;18(2):182-8. doi: 10.1177/104063870601800207.

Evaluation of five enzyme immunoassays compared with the cytotoxicity assay for 
diagnosis of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea in dogs.

Chouicha N(1), Marks SL.

Author information:
(1)University of California, Davis, School of Veterinary Medicine, Department of 
Medicine and Epidemiology, CA 95616, USA.

Clostridium difficile-associated-diarrhea (CDAD) is a nosocomial infection in 
dogs. Diagnosis of this infection is dependent on clinical signs of disease 
supported by laboratory detection of C. difficile toxins A or B, or both, in 
fecal specimens via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Unfortunately, to 
the authors' knowledge, commercially available ELISAs have not been validated in 
dogs to date. We evaluated 5 ELISAs done on 143 canine fecal specimens (100 
diarrheic and 43 nondiarrheic dogs) and on 29 C. difficile isolates. The results 
of each ELISA were compared with the cytotoxin B tissue culture assay (CTA). 
Clostridium difficile was isolated from 23% of the fecal specimens. Eighteen of 
the 143 fecal specimens were toxin positive (15 diarrheic and 3 nondiarrheic 
dogs). On the basis of multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis for 
toxin-A and -B genes, 72% of the isolates were toxigenic. The carriage rate of 
toxigenic isolates in diarrheic dogs was higher than that in the nondiarrheic 
dogs; however, these differences were not statistically significant. A good 
correlation was found between CTA, PCR, and culture results. The ELISAs done on 
fecal specimens collected from diarrheic dogs had low sensitivity (7-33%). In 
contrast, ELISA for toxin A or B, or both, performed on toxigenic isolates had 
high sensitivity (93%). These results suggest that commercially available human 
ELISAs are inadequate for the diagnosis of canine C. difficile-associated 
diarrhea when tested on fecal specimens. In contrast, the Premier ToxinA/B and 
Techlab ToxinA/B ELISAs may be useful for the diagnosis of canine CDAD when used 
on toxigenic isolates.

DOI: 10.1177/104063870601800207
PMID: 16617699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Oct;58(10):5714-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02903-14. 
Epub 2014 Jul 14.

In vivo assessment of SMT19969 in a hamster model of clostridium difficile 
infection.

Weiss W(1), Pulse M(2), Vickers R(3).

Author information:
(1)University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA 
william.weiss@unthsc.edu.
(2)University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.
(3)Summit plc, Oxfordshire, United Kingdom.

SMT19969 [2,2'-bis(4-pyridyl)3H,3'-H 5,5-bibenzimidazole] is a novel 
narrow-spectrum nonabsorbable antibiotic currently in development for the 
treatment of Clostridium difficile infection. The comparative activities of 
SMT19969 and vancomycin against nonepidemic and epidemic strains of C. difficile 
were studied in an established hamster model. Against nonepidemic (VA11) 
strains, the survival rates of SMT19969-treated animals ranged from 80% to 95%. 
Vancomycin exhibited 100% protection during treatment, with relapse observed 
starting on day 9 and 50% survival at day 20. At 50 mg/kg of body weight, 
SMT19969 administered orally once daily for 5 days provided full protection of 
treated animals on the dosing days and through day 12 against epidemic strains. 
Vancomycin also protected during the dosing interval, but apparent relapse 
occurred earlier, starting on day 11. SMT19969 exhibited excellent in vitro 
activity, with MICs of 0.25 μg/ml for all isolates. The MICs for vancomycin were 
2- to 4-fold higher at ≤0.5 to 1 μg/ml. All plasma sample concentrations of 
SMT19969 were below the limit of quantification (25 ng/ml) at all time points, 
consistent with the reported lack of bioavailability of the compound. Cecal 
concentrations were significantly above the MIC (ranging from 96 μg/ml to 172 
μg/ml).

Copyright © 2014 Weiss et al.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02903-14
PMCID: PMC4187990
PMID: 25022586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Arch Invest Med (Mex). 1991 Apr-Jun;22(2):189-96.

Toxigenicity and adherence in Clostridium difficile strains isolated from 
patients with and without diarrhoea.

González-Valencia G(1), Muñoz O, Torres JF.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Investigación, Clínica en Enfermedades Infecciosas y Parasitarias, 
I.M.S.S. y Fac. de Medicina, U.N.A.M., México, D.F.

The mechanisms by which Clostridium difficile causes diarrhoea are unknown. The 
expression of putative virulence factors by 44 Clostridium difficile strains 
isolated from patients with and without diarrhoea was studied. Toxins A and B 
were tested in CHO and MRC-5 cells, respectively; adherence was measured in two 
substrates: HEp-2 cells and polystyrene plates. The in vitro expression of 
toxins A and B by strains isolated from patients with diarrhoea was not 
significantly different from that by strains isolated from patients without 
diarrhoea. The ability of adherence to both HEp-2 cells and polystyrene by 
strains isolated from patients with diarrhoea was not significantly different 
when compared with strains isolated from patients without diarrhoea; however, 
strains isolated from adults with diarrhoea seem to adhere to a greater extent 
to both substrates than strains isolated from adults without diarrhoea. Twenty 
three strains which did not produce toxins A and B were tested for 
enterotoxicity in rat small intestine. Eight such strains induced fluid 
accumulation and seven of them were isolated from children. Adherence to cells 
and to polystyrene might be an important virulence factor in strains causing 
diarrhoea in adults; whereas the production of toxins other than A and B might 
be an important pathogenic mechanism in strains causing diarrhoea in children.

PMID: 1819993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2015 Jul;22(7):711-25. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00763-14. Epub 
2015 Apr 29.

A Combination of Three Fully Human Toxin A- and Toxin B-Specific Monoclonal 
Antibodies Protects against Challenge with Highly Virulent Epidemic Strains of 
Clostridium difficile in the Hamster Model.

Anosova NG(1), Cole LE(2), Li L(2), Zhang J(2), Brown AM(2), Mundle S(2), Zhang 
J(2), Ray S(2), Ma F(2), Garrone P(3), Bertraminelli N(3), Kleanthous H(2), 
Anderson SF(2).

Author information:
(1)Sanofi Pasteur Biologics, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 
natalie.anosova@sanofipasteur.com.
(2)Sanofi Pasteur Biologics, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)BliNK Biomedical SAS, Lyon, France.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the principal cause of nosocomial 
diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis associated with antibiotic therapy. Recent 
increases in the number of outbreaks attributed to highly virulent 
antibiotic-resistant strains underscore the importance of identifying 
efficacious alternatives to antibiotics to control this infection. CDI is 
mediated by two large exotoxins, toxins A and B. Strong humoral toxin-specific 
immune responses are associated with recovery and a lack of disease recurrence, 
whereas insufficient humoral responses are associated with recurrent CDI. 
Multiple approaches targeting these toxins, including intravenous 
immunoglobulin, neutralizing polymers, active vaccines, and, most recently, 
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs), have been explored, with various degrees of 
success. In this study, we describe the characterization of the first MAbs 
isolated from healthy human donors using a high-throughput B-cell cloning 
strategy. The MAbs were selected based on their ability to inhibit the actions 
of toxins A and B in vitro and because of their in vivo efficacy in a hamster 
challenge model. A potent 2-MAb cocktail was identified and then further 
potentiated by the addition of a second anti-toxin B MAb. This 3-MAb combination 
protected animals against mortality and also reduced the severity and duration 
of diarrhea associated with challenge with highly virulent strains of C. 
difficile toxinotypes 0 and III. This highly efficacious cocktail consists of 
one MAb specific to the receptor binding domain of toxin A and two MAbs specific 
to nonoverlapping regions of the glucosyltransferase domain of toxin B. This MAb 
combination offers great potential as a nonantibiotic treatment for the 
prevention of recurrent CDI.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00763-14
PMCID: PMC4478530
PMID: 25924765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Gastroenterology. 1996 Jun;110(6):1704-12. doi: 
10.1053/gast.1996.v110.pm8964394.

A human antibody binds to alpha-galactose receptors and mimics the effects of 
Clostridium difficile toxin A in rat colon.

Pothoulakis C(1), Galili U, Castagliuolo I, Kelly CP, Nikulasson S, Dudeja PK, 
Brasitus TA, LaMont JT.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Evans Memorial Department of Clinical Research, 
Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Nearly all human sera contain an immunoglobulin G antibody 
(antigalactose) that binds the trisaccharide Gal alpha 1-3Gal beta 1-4GlcNAc 
expressed on cells from most mammals but not humans. Because the Clostridium 
difficile toxin A receptor in rodents contains this trisaccharide, the aim of 
this study was to examine whether antigalactose could mimic the enterotoxic 
effects of toxin A and bind to receptors containing this trisaccharide.
METHODS: Fluid secretion, [3H]-mannitol permeability, and release of rat mast 
cell protease II and prostaglandin E2 were measured after luminal exposure of 
rat colon to either purified human anti-galactose, control immunoglobulin G, 
toxin A, or buffer.
RESULTS: Toxin A (5 micrograms) and antigalactose (250 micrograms) but not 
control immunoglobulin (250 micrograms) stimulated colonic fluid secretion and 
caused increased mannitol permeability and rat mast cell protease II release. 
Antigalactose and toxin A and, to a lesser degree, control immunoglobulin G also 
stimulated release of prostaglandin E2, but only toxin A produced acute 
inflammation of rat colonic mucosa. Antigalactose and toxin A bound specifically 
to a single class of colonic brush border receptors with dissociation constants 
of 10(-6) mol/L and 5.4 x 10(-8) mol/L, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Fluid secretion, increased permeability, and mast cell activation 
occur in rat colon when toxin A or human antigalactose immunoglobulin G bind to 
receptors bearing the trisaccharide Gal alpha 1-3Gal beta 1-4GlcNAc.

DOI: 10.1053/gast.1996.v110.pm8964394
PMID: 8964394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Infect Immun. 2012 Dec;80(12):4474-84. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00933-12. Epub 2012 Oct 
8.

Intrarectal instillation of Clostridium difficile toxin A triggers colonic 
inflammation and tissue damage: development of a novel and efficient mouse model 
of Clostridium difficile toxin exposure.

Hirota SA(1), Iablokov V, Tulk SE, Schenck LP, Becker H, Nguyen J, Al Bashir S, 
Dingle TC, Laing A, Liu J, Li Y, Bolstad J, Mulvey GL, Armstrong GD, MacNaughton 
WK, Muruve DA, MacDonald JA, Beck PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada. 
simon.hirota@ucalgary.ca

Clostridium difficile, a major cause of hospital-acquired diarrhea, triggers 
disease through the release of two toxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB). 
These toxins disrupt the cytoskeleton of the intestinal epithelial cell, 
increasing intestinal permeability and triggering the release of inflammatory 
mediators resulting in intestinal injury and inflammation. The most prevalent 
animal model to study TcdA/TcdB-induced intestinal injury involves injecting 
toxin into the lumen of a surgically generated "ileal loop." This model is 
time-consuming and exhibits variability depending on the expertise of the 
surgeon. Furthermore, the target organ of C. difficile infection (CDI) in humans 
is the colon, not the ileum. In the current study, we describe a new model of 
CDI that involves intrarectal instillation of TcdA/TcdB into the mouse colon. 
The administration of TcdA/TcdB triggered colonic inflammation and neutrophil 
and macrophage infiltration as well as increased epithelial barrier permeability 
and intestinal epithelial cell death. The damage and inflammation triggered by 
TcdA/TcdB isolates from the VPI and 630 strains correlated with the 
concentration of TcdA and TcdB produced. TcdA/TcdB exposure increased the 
expression of a number of inflammatory mediators associated with human CDI, 
including interleukin-6 (IL-6), gamma interferon (IFN-γ), and IL-1β. Finally, we 
were able to demonstrate that TcdA was much more potent at inducing colonic 
injury than was TcdB but TcdB could act synergistically with TcdA to exacerbate 
injury. Taken together, our data indicate that the intrarectal murine model 
provides a robust and efficient system to examine the effects of TcdA/TcdB on 
the induction of inflammation and colonic tissue damage in the context of human 
CDI.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00933-12
PMCID: PMC3497439
PMID: 23045481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2015 Oct;99(20):8549-62. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-015-6594-1. Epub 2015 May 5.

Targeting surface-layer proteins with single-domain antibodies: a potential 
therapeutic approach against Clostridium difficile-associated disease.

Kandalaft H(1), Hussack G(1), Aubry A(1), van Faassen H(1), Guan Y(1), 
Arbabi-Ghahroudi M(1)(2)(3), MacKenzie R(1)(3), Logan SM(1)(4), Tanha 
J(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Human Health Therapeutics Portfolio, National Research Council Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, K1A 0R6, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6, Canada.
(3)School of Environmental Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5, Canada.
(5)Human Health Therapeutics Portfolio, National Research Council Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, K1A 0R6, Canada. jamshid.tanha@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.
(6)School of Environmental Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, 
Canada. jamshid.tanha@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5, Canada. jamshid.tanha@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca.

Clostridium difficile is a leading cause of death from gastrointestinal 
infections in North America. Antibiotic therapy is effective, but the high 
incidence of relapse and the rise in hypervirulent strains warrant the search 
for novel treatments. Surface layer proteins (SLPs) cover the entire C. 
difficile bacterial surface, are composed of high-molecular-weight (HMW) and 
low-molecular-weight (LMW) subunits, and mediate adherence to host cells. 
Passive and active immunization against SLPs has enhanced hamster survival, 
suggesting that antibody-mediated neutralization may be an effective therapeutic 
strategy. Here, we isolated a panel of SLP-specific single-domain antibodies 
(VHHs) using an immune llama phage display library and SLPs isolated from C. 
difficile hypervirulent strain QCD-32g58 (027 ribotype) as a target antigen. 
Binding studies revealed a number of VHHs that bound QCD-32g58 SLPs with high 
affinity (K D = 3-6 nM) and targeted epitopes located on the LMW subunit of the 
SLP. The VHHs demonstrated melting temperatures as high as 75 °C, and a few were 
resistant to the gastrointestinal protease pepsin at physiologically relevant 
concentrations. In addition, we demonstrated the binding specificity of the VHHs 
to the major C. difficile ribotypes by whole cell ELISA, where all VHHs were 
found to bind 001 and 027 ribotypes, and a subset of antibodies were found to be 
broadly cross-reactive in binding cells representative of 012, 017, 023, and 078 
ribotypes. Finally, we showed that several of the VHHs inhibited C. difficile 
QCD-32g58 motility in vitro. Targeting SLPs with VHHs may be a viable 
therapeutic approach against C. difficile-associated disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-015-6594-1
PMCID: PMC4768215
PMID: 25936376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Infect Dis. 2007 Dec 15;196(12):1813-9. doi: 10.1086/523106.

Infection of hamsters with historical and epidemic BI types of Clostridium 
difficile.

Razaq N(1), Sambol S, Nagaro K, Zukowski W, Cheknis A, Johnson S, Gerding DN.

Author information:
(1)Stritch School of Medicine, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: North American and European hospitals have reported outbreaks of 
Clostridium difficile-associated disease with unexpectedly high mortality caused 
by a newly recognized group of C. difficile strains, group BI. Our objective was 
to compare, in hamsters, the virulence of a historical nonepidemic BI type, BI1, 
with that of 2 recent epidemic BI types, BI6 and BI17, and with that of 2 
standard toxigenic strains, K14 and 630.
METHODS: For each strain, 10 hamsters were given 1 dose of clindamycin, followed 
5 days later with 100 C. difficile spores administered by gastric inoculation. 
Outcomes were recorded.
RESULTS: The hamster model demonstrated variations in mean times from 
inoculation to death (for BI6, 40 h; for BI1, 48 h; for K14, 49 h; for BI17, 69 
h; for 630, 102 h; for BI6, BI1, and K14 vs. 630, P< .01; for BI17 vs. 630, P< 
.05) and from colonization to death (for BI1, 7 h; for BI17, 13 h; for BI6, 16 
h; for K14, 17 h; for 630, 52 h; for BI1, BI17, BI6, and K14 vs. 630, P< .01).
CONCLUSION: Group BI strains were not more rapidly fatal than the standard 
toxinotype 0 strain K14 but were more rapidly fatal than the standard toxinotype 
0 strain 630. BI6, the most common BI type in our collection, was particularly 
virulent in hamsters, consistently causing death within 48 h of inoculation.

DOI: 10.1086/523106
PMID: 18190262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Bacteriol. 2015 Sep;197(18):2930-40. doi: 10.1128/JB.00098-15. Epub 2015 Jul 
6.

Ferric Uptake Regulator Fur Control of Putative Iron Acquisition Systems in 
Clostridium difficile.

Ho TD(1), Ellermeier CD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA 
Theresa-ho@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic, Gram-positive, spore-forming 
opportunistic pathogen and is the most common cause of hospital-acquired 
infectious diarrhea. Although iron acquisition in the host is a key to survival 
of bacterial pathogens, high levels of intracellular iron can increase oxidative 
damage. Therefore, expression of iron acquisition mechanisms is tightly 
controlled by transcriptional regulators. We identified a C. difficile homologue 
of the master bacterial iron regulator Fur. Using targetron mutagenesis, we 
generated a fur insertion mutant of C. difficile. To identify the genes 
regulated by Fur in C. difficile, we used microarray analysis to compare 
transcriptional differences between the fur mutant and the wild type when grown 
in high-iron medium. The fur mutant had increased expression of greater than 70 
transcriptional units. Using quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR), 
we analyzed several of the Fur-regulated genes identified by the microarray and 
verified that they are both iron and Fur regulated in C. difficile. Among those 
Fur- and iron-repressed genes were C. difficile genes encoding 7 putative cation 
transport systems of different classes. We found that Fur was able to bind the 
DNA upstream of three Fur-repressed genes in electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays. We also demonstrate that expression of Fur-regulated putative iron 
acquisition systems was increased during C. difficile infection using the 
hamster model. Our data suggest that C. difficile expresses multiple iron 
transport mechanisms in response iron depletion in vitro and in vivo.
IMPORTANCE: Clostridium difficile is the most common cause of hospital-acquired 
infectious diarrhea and has been recently classified as an "urgent" antibiotic 
resistance threat by the CDC. To survive and cause disease, most bacterial 
pathogens must acquire the essential enzymatic cofactor iron. While import of 
adequate iron is essential for most bacterial growth, excess intracellular iron 
can lead to extensive oxidative damage. Thus, bacteria must regulate iron import 
to maintain iron homeostasis. We demonstrate here that C. difficile regulates 
expression of several putative iron acquisition systems using the 
transcriptional regulator Fur. These import mechanisms are induced under 
iron-limiting conditions in vitro and during C. difficile infection of the host. 
This suggests that during a C. difficile infection, iron availability is limited 
in vivo.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.00098-15
PMCID: PMC4542176
PMID: 26148711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Gastroenterology. 1993 Sep;105(3):701-7. doi: 10.1016/0016-5085(93)90886-h.

Ketotifen inhibits Clostridium difficile toxin A-induced enteritis in rat ileum.

Pothoulakis C(1), Karmeli F, Kelly CP, Eliakim R, Joshi MA, O'Keane CJ, 
Castagliuolo I, LaMont JT, Rachmilewitz D.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, University Hospital, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile toxin A is the principal mediator of 
inflammatory enterocolitis in experimental animals. The purpose of this study 
was to explore the effect of ketotifen, an anti-inflammatory drug, on toxin 
A-induced enterotoxicity in rat ileum.
METHODS: The effects of intragastric administration of ketotifen on secretion, 
mannitol permeability, histological damage, and mucosal levels of leukotriene 
B4, leukotriene C4, and platelet activating factor in toxin A-exposed rat ileal 
loops were measured in vivo. The effects of ketotifen on toxin A-mediated 
release of rat mast cell protease II (rat mucosa mast cell product) release were 
also measured in rat ileal explants in vitro. The effect of ketotifen on 
neutrophil migration in vitro was also evaluated.
RESULTS: Ketotifen pretreatment inhibited toxin A-associated intestinal 
secretion by 42.5% and mannitol permeability by 56.3% and reduced epithelial 
cell inflammation and necrosis. These effects were associated with reduced 
levels of leukotriene B4 by 65.8%, leukotriene C4 by 88.8%, platelet activating 
factor by 77.8%, and inhibition of rat mast cell protease II by 58.4%. In 
addition, pretreatment of neutrophils with ketotifen inhibited neutrophil 
migration in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: The protective effect of ketotifen in this animal model was 
associated with significant inhibition of release of mast cells and neutrophil 
derived mediators, supporting their involvement in C. difficile enteritis.

DOI: 10.1016/0016-5085(93)90886-h
PMID: 8395445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Infect Immun. 1995 Dec;63(12):4619-27. doi: 10.1128/IAI.63.12.4619-4627.1995.

Evaluation of formalin-inactivated Clostridium difficile vaccines administered 
by parenteral and mucosal routes of immunization in hamsters.

Torres JF(1), Lyerly DM, Hill JE, Monath TP.

Author information:
(1)OraVax, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Clostridium difficile produces toxins that cause inflammation, necrosis, and 
fluid in the intestine and is the most important cause of nosocomial 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis. We evaluated C. difficile antigens 
as vaccines to protect against systemic and intestinal disease in a hamster 
model of clindamycin colitis. Formalin-inactivated culture filtrates from a 
highly toxigenic strain were administered by mucosal routes (intranasal, 
intragastric, and rectal) with cholera toxin as a mucosal adjuvant. A 
preparation of culture filtrate and killed whole cells was also tested rectally. 
The toxoid was also tested parenterally (subcutaneously and intraperitoneally) 
and by a combination of three intranasal immunizations followed by a combined 
intranasal-intraperitoneal boost. Serum antibodies against toxins A and B and 
whole-cell antigen were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 
neutralization of cytotoxic activity, and bacterial agglutination. The two 
rectal immunization regimens induced low antibody responses and protected only 
20% of hamsters against death and 0% against diarrhea. The intragastric regimen 
induced high antibody responses but low protection, 40% against death and 0% 
against diarrhea. Hamsters immunized by the intranasal, intraperitoneal, and 
subcutaneous routes were 100% protected against death and partially protected 
(40, 40, and 20%, respectively) against diarrhea. Among the latter groups, 
intraperitoneally immunized animals had the highest serum anticytotoxic activity 
and the highest agglutinating antibody responses. Hamsters immunized 
intranasally and revaccinated intraperitoneally were 100% protected against both 
death and diarrhea. Protection against death and diarrhea correlated with 
antibody responses to all antigens tested. The results indicate that optimal 
protection against C. difficile disease can be achieved with combined parenteral 
and mucosal immunization.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.63.12.4619-4627.1995
PMCID: PMC173664
PMID: 7591115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Lancet. 1978 May 20;1(8073):1063-6. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(78)90912-1.

Clostridium difficile and the aetiology of pseudomembranous colitis.

Larson HE, Price AB, Honour P, Borriello SP.

Bacterial isolates from 5 patients with pseudomembranous colitis (P.M.C.) were 
screened for toxin production. Strains of Clostridium from 4 patients produced 
in vitro a toxin similar to that found in P.M.C. faecal suspension. These were 
identified as C. difficile. Use of the strains from 2 patients induced a fatal 
enterocolitis when inoculated orally into hamsters pretreated with vancomycin. 
The C. difficile that produced the toxin in vitro was then re-isolated from 
hamster caecal contents. These findings suggest that P.M.C. results from 
infection with C. difficile and that previous antibiotic therapy produces 
susceptibility to infection.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(78)90912-1
PMID: 77366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci. 2010 May;49(3):274-81.

Physiologic reference ranges for captive black-tailed prairie dogs (Cynomys 
ludovicianus).

Keckler MS(1), Gallardo-Romero NF, Langham GL, Damon IK, Karem KL, Carroll DS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Viral and Rickettsial Disease, Poxvirus and Rabies Branch, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. hbq0@cdc.gov

The black-tailed prairie dog (Cynomys ludovicianus) is a member of the order 
Rodentia and the family Sciuridae. Ecologically, prairie dogs are a keystone 
species in prairie ecology. This species is used as an animal model for human 
gallbladder disease and diseases caused by infection with Clostridium difficile, 
Yersinia pestis, Francisella tularensis, and most recently, Orthopoxvirus. 
Despite increasing numbers of prairie dogs used in research and kept as pets, 
few data are available on their baseline physiology in animal facility housing 
conditions. To establish baseline physiologic reference ranges, we designed a 
study using 18 wild-caught black-tailed prairie dogs. Telemetry data were 
analyzed to establish circadian rhythms for activity and temperature. In 
addition, hematologic and serum chemistry analyses were performed. Baseline 
measurements were used to establish the mean for each animal, which then were 
compiled and analyzed to determine the reference ranges. Here we present 
physiologic data on serum chemistry and hematology profiles, as well as weight, 
core body temperature, and daily activity patterns for black-tailed prairie 
dogs. These results reflect the use of multiple measurements from species- and 
age-matched prairie dogs and likely will be useful to ecologists, scientists 
interested in using this animal model in research, and veterinarians caring for 
pet prairie dogs.

PMCID: PMC2877297
PMID: 20587156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Infect Immun. 1996 Dec;64(12):5225-32. doi: 10.1128/IAI.64.12.5225-5232.1996.

Saccharomyces boulardii protease inhibits Clostridium difficile toxin A effects 
in the rat ileum.

Castagliuolo I(1), LaMont JT, Nikulasson ST, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Saccharomyces boulardii, a nonpathogenic yeast, is effective in treating some 
patients with Clostridium difficile diarrhea and colitis. We have previously 
reported that S. boulardii inhibits rat ileal secretion in response to C. 
difficile toxin A possibly by releasing a protease that digests the intestinal 
receptor for this toxin (C. Pothoulakis, C. P. Kelly, M. A. Joshi, N. Gao, C. J. 
O'Keane, I. Castagliuolo, and J. T. LaMont, Gastroenterology 104: 1108-1115, 
1993). The aim of this study was to purify and characterize this protease. S. 
boulardii protease was partially purified by gel filtration on Sephadex G-50 and 
octyl-Sepharose. The effect of S. boulardii protease on rat ileal secretion, 
epithelial permeability, and morphology in response to toxin A was examined in 
rat ileal loops in vivo. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis of the purified S. boulardii protease revealed a major band at 
54 kDa. Pretreatment of rat ileal brush border (BB) membranes with partially 
purified protease reduced specific toxin A receptor binding (by 26%). Partially 
purified protease digested the toxin A molecule and significantly reduced its 
binding to BB membranes in vitro (by 42%). Preincubation of toxin A with S. 
boulardii protease inhibited ileal secretion (46% inhibition, P < 0.01), 
mannitol permeability (74% inhibition, P < 0.01), and histologic damage caused 
by toxin A. Thus, S. boulardii protease inhibits the intestinal effects of C. 
difficile toxin A by proteolysis of the toxin and inhibition of toxin A binding 
to its BB receptor. Our results may be relevant to the mechanism by which S. 
boulardii exerts its protective effects in C. difficile infection in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.64.12.5225-5232.1996
PMCID: PMC174512
PMID: 8945570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Sci Transl Med. 2017 Sep 6;9(406):eaah6813. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah6813.

New class of precision antimicrobials redefines role of Clostridium difficile 
S-layer in virulence and viability.

Kirk JA(1), Gebhart D(2), Buckley AM(3), Lok S(2), Scholl D(2), Douce GR(3), 
Govoni GR(4), Fagan RP(5).

Author information:
(1)Krebs Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, 
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.
(2)AvidBiotics Corp., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(3)Institute of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, College of Medical, 
Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8TA, UK.
(4)AvidBiotics Corp., South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA. ggovons@gmail.com 
r.fagan@sheffield.ac.uk.
(5)Krebs Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, 
University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK. ggovons@gmail.com 
r.fagan@sheffield.ac.uk.

There is a medical need for antibacterial agents that do not damage the resident 
gut microbiota or promote the spread of antibiotic resistance. We recently 
described a prototypic precision bactericidal agent, Av-CD291.2, which 
selectively kills specific Clostridium difficile strains and prevents them from 
colonizing mice. We have since selected two Av-CD291.2-resistant mutants that 
have a surface (S)-layer-null phenotype due to distinct point mutations in the 
slpA gene. Using newly identified bacteriophage receptor binding proteins for 
targeting, we constructed a panel of Avidocin-CDs that kills diverse C. 
difficile isolates in an S-layer sequence-dependent manner. In addition to 
bacteriophage receptor recognition, characterization of the mutants also 
uncovered important roles for S-layer protein A (SlpA) in sporulation, 
resistance to innate immunity effectors, and toxin production. Surprisingly, 
S-layer-null mutants were found to persist in the hamster gut despite a complete 
attenuation of virulence. These findings suggest antimicrobials targeting 
virulence factors dispensable for fitness in the host force pathogens to trade 
virulence for viability and would have clear clinical advantages should 
resistance emerge. Given their exquisite specificity for the pathogen, 
Avidocin-CDs have substantial therapeutic potential for the treatment and 
prevention of C. difficile infections.

Copyright © 2017 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah6813
PMCID: PMC5603275
PMID: 28878013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: D.G., S.L., D.S., and 
G.R.G. are current or past employees of and own stock in AvidBiotics Corp. 
R.P.F. received a research grant from AvidBiotics Corp. AvidBiotics Corp. hold 
the following patents: US8206971 (Modified bacteriocins and methods for their 
use), US8673291 (Diffocins and methods of use therof), US9115354 (Diffocins and 
methods of use therof), and EP2576604 (Diffocins and methods of use therof).


316. Vet Microbiol. 2013 Sep 27;166(1-2):225-32. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.05.003. 
Epub 2013 May 20.

Diarrhea-associated pathogens, lactobacilli and cellulolytic bacteria in equine 
feces: responses to antibiotic challenge.

Harlow BE(1), Lawrence LM, Flythe MD.

Author information:
(1)University of Kentucky, Department of Animal and Food Sciences, Lexington, KY 
40546, USA.

Antibiotics are important to equine medicine, but antibiotic-associated diarrhea 
(AAD) can lead to poor performance and even mortality. AAD is attributed to 
disruption of the hindgut microbiota, which permits proliferation of pathogenic 
microbes. The goal of this study was to evaluate the effects of common 
antibiotics on cellulolytic bacteria, lactobacilli, and AAD-associated pathogens 
in the feces of healthy horses. Fifteen horses were assigned to three treatment 
groups (blocked by age and sex): control (no antibiotics), 
trimethoprim-sulfadiazine (PO), or ceftiofur (IM). Fecal samples (n=8 per horse) 
were taken during dietary adaptation (3 weeks), antibiotic challenge (1 week), 
and withdrawal (1 week). Bacteria were enumerated by serial dilution and viable 
count. Cellulolytic bacteria decreased by >99% during administration of either 
antibiotic (P<0.0001) and were still less than controls at the end of the 
withdrawal period (P<0.0001). Fecal samples from horses challenged with 
ceftiofur had 75% fewer lactobacilli than those from control horses at the end 
of the antibiotic challenge period (P<0.05). Antibiotic challenged horses also 
shed more salmonella than control horses (P<0.05). Antibiotics had no effect on 
the number of Clostridium perfringens isolates. There was no detectable 
Clostridium difficile during adaptation or in any control horse. C. difficile 
increased (P<0.0001) to approximately 10(4)cfu/g when horses were challenged 
with antibiotics, and were still detectable 1 week after withdrawal. These 
results indicate that antibiotics can disrupt the normal gastrointestinal 
microbiota and allow proliferation of Salmonella spp. and C. difficile.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2013.05.003
PMID: 23769300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Zentralbl Veterinarmed B. 1989 Oct;36(8):568-76.

[The occurrence of Clostridium difficile in fecal samples of dogs and cats].

[Article in German]

Weber A, Kroth P, Heil G.

Fecal samples of 150 dogs and 175 cats originating from different veterinary 
practices were investigated for assessing the occurrence of Clostridium (Cl.) 
difficile by using a selective medium for cultural isolation. From dogs without 
enteric symptoms 7 (9.3%) of 75 samples were positive for Cl. difficile, with 2 
strains being cytotoxic for bovine embryonic lung fibroblast cells, which could 
be neutralized by Cl. difficile-antitoxin. In samples of 75 dogs with enteric 
symptoms Cl. difficile could be isolated in 2 cases (2.7%). In cats 9 (9%) of 
100 fecal samples deriving from animals without enteric symptoms contained Cl. 
difficile, while in 75 cats with enteric symptoms, the isolation rate was 6.7% 
(5 strains). Of either group only 1 Cl. difficile-strain showed cytotoxicity for 
tissue culture. The results of this study allow to conclude, that in contrast to 
the significance for man Cl. difficile is neither for dogs nor for cats an 
important enteric agent. However these pets can harbour and shed strains of Cl. 
difficile, even cytotoxigenic ones, in faeces. In view of these findings the 
possibility of occasional human infections by household dogs or cats needs 
attention and further investigation.

PMID: 2596198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Bioorg Med Chem. 2016 Dec 15;24(24):6291-6297. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.04.043. 
Epub 2016 Apr 22.

Discovery and development of kibdelomycin, a new class of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics targeting the clinically proven bacterial type II topoisomerase.

Singh SB(1).

Author information:
(1)SBS Pharma Consulting LLC, Edison, NJ 08820, United States. Electronic 
address: Sheo.Singh.215@gmail.com.

Kibdelomycin is a complex novel antibiotic, discovered by applying a highly 
sophisticated chemical-genetic Staphylococcus aureus Fitness Test (SaFT) 
approach, that inhibits the clinically established bacterial targets, gyrase and 
topoisomerase IV. It exhibits broad-spectrum antibacterial activity against 
aerobic bacteria including MRSA and Acinetobacter baumannii. It is slowly 
bactericidal and has a low frequency of resistance. In an anaerobic environment, 
it exhibits narrow-spectrum activity and inhibits the growth of gut bacteria 
Clostridium difficile (MIC 0.125μg/mL) without affecting the growth of commensal 
Gram-negative organisms particularly, Bacteroides sp. It is highly efficacious 
in the hamster model of C. difficile infection providing 100% protection at 
>6mg/kg and 80% protection at 1.56mg/kg by oral dosing without systemic 
exposure. X-ray co-crystal structures of kibdelomycin bound to GyrB and ParE 
showed a unique dual arm 'U shaped' multisite binding never encountered with any 
other gyrase inhibitors. Kibdelomycin is poised for preclinical development for 
C. difficile treatment, and most importantly, the co-crystal structures of 
kibdelomycin provide unique insight for structure-guided structure modification, 
which could lead to better broader-spectrum systemic antibiotic potentially 
covering many ESKAPE pathogens.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2016.04.043
PMID: 27143131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Pept Sci. 2017 Nov;23(11):833-839. doi: 10.1002/psc.3046. Epub 2017 Sep 26.

The American cockroach peptide periplanetasin-4 inhibits Clostridium difficile 
toxin A-induced cell toxicities and inflammatory responses in the mouse gut.

Yoon IN(1), Lu LF(2), Hong J(1), Zhang P(1), Kim DH(1), Kang JK(3), Hwang JS(4), 
Kim H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Life Science and Chemistry, College of Natural Science, Daejin 
University, Pocheon, Gyeonggido, 11159, Korea.
(2)Hainan Institute of Science and Technology, Haikou, 571126, China.
(3)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Incheon, 406-840, Korea.
(4)Department of Agricultural Biology, National Academy of Agricultural Science, 
RDA, Wanju, 55365, Korea.

Many reports have shown that crude extracts of the American cockroach have 
therapeutic effects on inflammation. In a previous study, our research group 
showed that an antimicrobial peptide (Periplanetasin-2) derived from the 
American cockroach via de novo transcriptome analysis inhibited apoptosis of 
human colonocytes and inflammatory responses of the mouse gut caused by 
Clostridium difficile toxin A. Here, we examined whether Periplanetasin-4 
(Peri-4), another antimicrobial peptide identified via de novo transcriptome 
analysis of the American cockroach, could also inhibit the various toxicities 
induced by C. difficile toxin A. We found that Peri-4 significantly reduced the 
cell viability loss and cell apoptosis caused by toxin A in vitro. Peri-4 also 
ameliorated the severe inflammatory responses seen in the toxin A-induced mouse 
enteritis model, rescuing the villus disruption and interleukin-6 production 
induced by luminal injection of toxin A into the mouse gut. Mechanistically, we 
found that Peri-4 could reduce toxin A-induced reactive oxygen species 
production to inhibit the activations of p38MAPK and p21Cip1/Waf1 , which are 
critical for the cell damages induced by toxin A. These results collectively 
suggest that the Peri-4 may be a potential therapeutic agent for treating toxin 
A-induced pseudomembranous colitis. Copyright © 2017 European Peptide Society 
and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2017 European Peptide Society and John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/psc.3046
PMID: 28949065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Infect Immun. 1999 Feb;67(2):527-38. doi: 10.1128/IAI.67.2.527-538.1999.

Serum antitoxin antibodies mediate systemic and mucosal protection from 
Clostridium difficile disease in hamsters.

Giannasca PJ(1), Zhang ZX, Lei WD, Boden JA, Giel MA, Monath TP, Thomas WD Jr.

Author information:
(1)OraVax, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. pgiannas@oravax.com

Clostridium difficile is the bacterial pathogen identified as the cause of 
pseudomembranous colitis and is principally responsible for nosocomial 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis. The pathologic findings associated 
with this infection are believed to be caused by two large (approximately 
300-kDa) exotoxins, toxins A and B. Because of the mucosal nature of this 
infection, vaccination strategies aimed at providing prophylactic or therapeutic 
immune protection have included immunization by mucosal routes. Using the 
hamster model of C. difficile infection, we examined the protective efficacy of 
inactivated toxin (toxoid) vaccine formulations prepared as either culture 
filtrate or partially purified toxoid. We compared combination parenteral and 
mucosal vaccination regimens involving intranasal, intragastric, or rectal 
routes of immunization and found that rectal immunization in conjunction with 
intramuscular (i.m.) vaccination provided full protection of hamsters from death 
and diarrhea while the other mucosal routes did not. Protection was associated 
with high levels of toxin-neutralizing antibodies in serum. The requirement for 
adjuvants for protection was assessed by using sequential i.m. and rectal or 
i.m. vaccination regimens. Unexpectedly, i.m. immunization without adjuvant 
conferred the highest protection from death and diarrhea; this regimen elicited 
the highest serum anti-toxin B titers as well as toxin B neutralizing titers. 
Passive transfer of mouse antitoxin antibodies protected hamsters in a 
dose-dependent manner, demonstrating the principal role of circulating antitoxin 
antibodies in immunity from this toxin-mediated mucosal disease. These results 
suggest that prophylactic parenteral vaccination or intravenous immunotherapy 
could provide protection from C. difficile disease in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.2.527-538.1999
PMCID: PMC96351
PMID: 9916055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. BMC Neurosci. 2012 May 28;13:53. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-53.

Mechanisms of constitutive and ATP-evoked ATP release in neonatal mouse 
olfactory epithelium.

Hayoz S(1), Jia C, Hegg C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

BACKGROUND: ATP is an extracellular signaling molecule with many ascribed 
functions in sensory systems, including the olfactory epithelium. The 
mechanism(s) by which ATP is released in the olfactory epithelium has not been 
investigated. Quantitative luciferin-luciferase assays were used to monitor ATP 
release, and confocal imaging of the fluorescent ATP marker quinacrine was used 
to monitor ATP release via exocytosis in Swiss Webster mouse neonatal olfactory 
epithelial slices.
RESULTS: Under control conditions, constitutive release of ATP occurs via 
exocytosis, hemichannels and ABC transporters and is inhibited by vesicular 
fusion inhibitor Clostridium difficile toxin A and hemichannel and ABC 
transporter inhibitor probenecid. Constitutive ATP release is negatively 
regulated by the ATP breakdown product ADP through activation of P2Y receptors, 
likely via the cAMP/PKA pathway. In vivo studies indicate that constitutive ATP 
may play a role in neuronal homeostasis as inhibition of exocytosis inhibited 
normal proliferation in the OE. ATP-evoked ATP release is also present in mouse 
neonatal OE, triggered by several ionotropic P2X purinergic receptor agonists 
(ATP, αβMeATP and Bz-ATP) and a G protein-coupled P2Y receptor agonist (UTP). 
Calcium imaging of P2X2-transfected HEK293 "biosensor" cells confirmed the 
presence of evoked ATP release. Following purinergic receptor stimulation, ATP 
is released via calcium-dependent exocytosis, activated P2X1,7 receptors, 
activated P2X7 receptors that form a complex with pannexin channels, or ABC 
transporters. The ATP-evoked ATP release is inhibited by the purinergic receptor 
inhibitor PPADS, Clostridium difficile toxin A and two inhibitors of pannexin 
channels: probenecid and carbenoxolone.
CONCLUSIONS: The constitutive release of ATP might be involved in normal cell 
turn-over or modulation of odorant sensitivity in physiological conditions. 
Given the growth-promoting effects of ATP, ATP-evoked ATP release following 
injury could lead to progenitor cell proliferation, differentiation and 
regeneration. Thus, understanding mechanisms of ATP release is of paramount 
importance to improve our knowledge about tissue homeostasis and post-injury 
neuroregeneration. It will lead to development of treatments to restore loss of 
smell and, when transposed to the central nervous system, improve recovery 
following central nervous system injury.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-53
PMCID: PMC3444318
PMID: 22640172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Apr 28;26(4):693-9. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1511.11063.

Potassium Acetate Blocks Clostridium difficile Toxin A-Induced Microtubule 
Disassembly by Directly Inhibiting Histone Deacetylase 6, Thereby Ameliorating 
Inflammatory Responses in the Gut.

Lu LF(1)(2), Kim DH(1), Lee IH(1), Hong J(1), Zhang P(1), Yoon IN(1), Hwang 
JS(3), Kim H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin University, 
Pocheon 11159, Republic of Korea.
(2)Hainan Institute of Science and Technology, Haikou 571126, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Agricultural Biology, National Academy of Agricultural Science, 
RDA, Jeonju 54875, Republic of Korea.

Clostridium difficile toxin A is known to cause deacetylation of tubulin 
proteins, which blocks microtubule formation and triggers barrier dysfunction in 
the gut. Based on our previous finding that the Clostridium difficile toxin 
A-dependent activation of histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC-6) is responsible for 
tubulin deacetylation and subsequent microtubule disassembly, we herein examined 
the possible effect of potassium acetate (PA; whose acetyl group prevents the 
binding of tubulin to HDAC-6) as a competitive/false substrate. Our results 
revealed that PA inhibited toxin A-induced deacetylation of tubulin and 
recovered toxin A-induced microtubule disassembly. In addition, PA treatment 
significantly decreased the production of IL-6 (a marker of inflamed tissue) in 
the toxin A-induced mouse enteritis model. An in vitro HDAC assay revealed that 
PA directly inhibited HDAC-6-mediated tubulin deacetylation, indicating that PA 
acted as a false substrate for HDAC-6. These results collectively indicate that 
PA treatment inhibits HDAC-6, thereby reducing the cytotoxicity and inflammatory 
responses caused by C. difficile toxin A.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1511.11063
PMID: 26809801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Infect Immun. 2009 Dec;77(12):5478-85. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00551-09. Epub 2009 Sep 
14.

Distinctive profiles of infection and pathology in hamsters infected with 
Clostridium difficile strains 630 and B1.

Goulding D(1), Thompson H, Emerson J, Fairweather NF, Dougan G, Douce GR.

Author information:
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, 
Cambridge CB10 1SA, United Kingdom.

Currently, the Golden Syrian hamster is widely considered an important model of 
Clostridium difficile disease, as oral infection of this animal pretreated with 
antibiotics reproduces many of the symptoms observed in humans. Two C. difficile 
strains, B1 and 630, showed significant differences in the progression and 
severity of disease in this model. B1-infected hamsters exhibited more severe 
pathology and a shorter time to death than hamsters infected with 630. 
Histological changes in the gut did not correlate with absolute numbers of C. 
difficile bacteria, but there were clear differences in the distribution of 
bacteria within gut tissues. Light, scanning, and transmission electron 
microscopy revealed high numbers of B1 bacteria at the mucosal surface of the 
tissue, whereas 630 bacteria were more frequently associated with the crypt 
regions. Both B1 and 630 bacteria were frequently observed within 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes, although, interestingly, a space frequently 
separated B1 bacteria from the phagosome wall, a phenomenon not observed with 
630. However, pilus-like structures were detected on 630 located in the crypts 
of the gut tissue. Furthermore, B1 bacteria, but not 630 bacteria, were found 
within nonphagocytic cells, including enterocytes and muscle cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00551-09
PMCID: PMC2786451
PMID: 19752031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Infect Immun. 2001 Dec;69(12):7937-40. doi: 10.1128/IAI.69.12.7937-7940.2001.

Role of FliC and FliD flagellar proteins of Clostridium difficile in adherence 
and gut colonization.

Tasteyre A(1), Barc MC, Collignon A, Boureau H, Karjalainen T.

Author information:
(1)Département de Microbiologie, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université de Paris-Sud, 
92296 Châtenay-Malabry Cedex, France.

In vitro and in vivo adhesive properties of flagella and recombinant flagellin 
FliC and flagellar cap FliD proteins of Clostridium difficile were analyzed. 
FliC, FliD, and crude flagella adhered in vitro to axenic mouse cecal mucus. 
Radiolabeled cultured cells bound to a high degree to FliD and weakly to 
flagella deposited on a membrane. The tissue association in the mouse cecum of a 
nonflagellated strain was 10-fold lower than that of a flagellated strain 
belonging to the same serogroup, confirming the role of flagella in adherence.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.12.7937-7940.2001
PMCID: PMC98895
PMID: 11705981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Toxicon. 1992 Apr;30(4):419-26. doi: 10.1016/0041-0101(92)90538-g.

Sensitivity in culture of epithelial cells from rhesus monkey kidney and human 
colon carcinoma to toxins A and B from Clostridium difficile.

Torres J(1), Camorlinga-Ponce M, Muñoz O.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Investigacion Clinica en Enfermedades Infecciosas y Parasitarias, 
Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Hospital de Pediatria, D.F.

The effect of toxins A and B from Clostridium difficile on human colon carcinoma 
cells (HT-29, epithelial), rhesus monkey kidney cells (MA-104, epithelial) and 
green monkey kidney cells (VERO, fibroblast) was studied. Both toxins caused 
rounding of HT-29 cells and rounding with projections remaining attached to the 
substrate in MA-104 and VERO cells; however, the sensitivity to each toxin 
varies considerably. Toxin A was detected in ng by VERO, pg by HT-29 and 
fractions of pg by MA-104 cells; for toxin B, pg were detected by VERO, ng by 
MA-104 and micrograms by HT-29 cells. HT-29 cells were grown with galactose to 
allow their differentiation to enterocytes, and their sensitivity to the toxins 
during the process was studied. At early stages, the sensitivity to both toxins 
was similar, and as the differentiation proceeded, the response to both toxins 
decreased continuously, and after 16 days no evident morphological effect was 
observed, even with micrograms amounts of either toxin. In contrast to all cell 
lines reported to date, HT-29 and MA-104 epithelial cells are exquisitely 
sensitive to toxin A and less responsive to toxin B. The rounding of HT-29 by 
these toxins depends on the degree of differentiation of the cell.

DOI: 10.1016/0041-0101(92)90538-g
PMID: 1626323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Anaerobe. 2016 Oct;41:58-67. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.05.015. Epub 2016 Jun 
2.

Development of SYN-004, an oral beta-lactamase treatment to protect the gut 
microbiome from antibiotic-mediated damage and prevent Clostridium difficile 
infection.

Kaleko M(1), Bristol JA(2), Hubert S(2), Parsley T(3), Widmer G(4), Tzipori 
S(4), Subramanian P(5), Hasan N(5), Koski P(6), Kokai-Kun J(2), Sliman J(2), 
Jones A(2), Connelly S(2).

Author information:
(1)Synthetic Biologics, Inc., Rockville, MD, USA. Electronic address: 
mkaleko@syntheticbiologics.com.
(2)Synthetic Biologics, Inc., Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)SynPhaGen, LLC, Rockville, MD, USA.
(4)Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA, USA.
(5)CosmosID, Inc., Rockville, MD, USA.
(6)Ipsat Therapies, Helsinki, Finland (closed 2011).

The gut microbiome, composed of the microflora that inhabit the gastrointestinal 
tract and their genomes, make up a complex ecosystem that can be disrupted by 
antibiotic use. The ensuing dysbiosis is conducive to the emergence of 
opportunistic pathogens such as Clostridium difficile. A novel approach to 
protect the microbiome from antibiotic-mediated dysbiosis is the use of 
beta-lactamase enzymes to degrade residual antibiotics in the gastrointestinal 
tract before the microflora are harmed. Here we present the preclinical 
development and early clinical studies of the beta-lactamase enzymes, P3A, 
currently referred to as SYN-004, and its precursor, P1A. Both P1A and SYN-004 
were designed as orally-delivered, non-systemically available therapeutics for 
use with intravenous beta-lactam antibiotics. SYN-004 was engineered from P1A, a 
beta-lactamase isolated from Bacillus licheniformis, to broaden its antibiotic 
degradation profile. SYN-004 efficiently hydrolyses penicillins and 
cephalosporins, the most widely used IV beta-lactam antibiotics. In animal 
studies, SYN-004 degraded ceftriaxone in the GI tract of dogs and protected the 
microbiome of pigs from ceftriaxone-induced changes. Phase I clinical studies 
demonstrated SYN-004 safety and tolerability. Phase 2 studies are in progress to 
assess the utility of SYN-004 for the prevention of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea and Clostridium difficile disease.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.05.015
PMID: 27262694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Gut. 1990 Jul;31(7):781-5. doi: 10.1136/gut.31.7.781.

Enterotoxins from Clostridium difficile; diarrhoeogenic potency and 
morphological effects in the rat intestine.

Torres J(1), Jennische E, Lange S, Lönnroth I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Gothenburg University, Sweden.

The action of toxins A, B, and C from Clostridium difficile was studied in the 
small intestine and colon of rats. All three caused fluid accumulation in the 
small intestine, maximal secretion being induced by 1 micrograms of toxin A, 20 
micrograms of B, and 15 micrograms of C. Both toxins A and C caused shedding of 
epithelial cells from the villi without visible damage to crypt cells; toxin A 
caused further extensive necrosis and bleeding. Toxin B caused secretion without 
visible damage to the epithelial cells, though this activity was unstable and 
decreased significantly after one week of storage. In the colon, toxin A caused 
secretion and shedding of surface epithelial cells without damage to crypt 
cells, toxin C caused only a weak secretion, and toxin B had no effect at all. 
In terms of immunohistochemistry, it was found that toxin A bound to the 
enterocytes at the tips of the villi but not to goblet and crypt cells. The 
complex expression or interaction of the toxins produced by Cl difficile may 
explain the broad spectrum of disease (diarrhoea, colitis, and pseudomembranous 
colitis) associated with this micro-organism.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.31.7.781
PMCID: PMC1378535
PMID: 2115017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021 Jan 10;18(2):513. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph18020513.

A Pilot Study on the Contamination of Assistance Dogs' Paws and Their Users' 
Shoe Soles in Relation to Admittance to Hospitals and (In)Visible Disability.

Vos SJ(1), Wijnker JJ(1), Overgaauw PAM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health Sciences, Institute for Risk Assessment 
Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80178, 
3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands.

(1) Background: People with disabilities may benefit from an assistance dog 
(AD). Despite regulations that prohibit the denial of ADs to public places, this 
still occurs on a regular basis. The main argument for denial of access is that 
dogs compromise hygiene with their presence, which could cause a health hazard. 
Meanwhile, people are allowed to walk into and out of public places freely. (2) 
Objective: As a pilot study, to investigate the number of Enterobacteriaceae and 
the presence of Clostridium difficile bacteria on the paws of ADs and pet dogs 
(PDs) as well as the shoe soles of their users and owners. With the results, an 
assessment can be made as to whether measures are required to reduce 
environmental contamination (e.g., in hospitals). (3) Methods: In total, 25 ADs, 
25 PDs, and their 50 users/owners participated in the study. Each participant 
walked their dog for 15-30 min prior to the sampling of the front paws. Each PD 
owner or AD user filled out a general questionnaire about the care of their 
dogs, and AD users were asked to fill out an additional questionnaire on their 
experiences regarding the admittance of their ADs to public places (in 
particular, hospitals). Dutch hospitals were questioned on their protocols 
regarding the admittance of ADs and their visitor numbers, including the 
percentage of AD users, to put these numbers into perspective. (4) Results: Dog 
paws were more often negative for Enterobacteriaceae compared to shoe soles (72% 
and 42%, respectively) and also had significantly lower bacterial counts (mean 
of 3.54log10 and 5.03log10 colony-forming units (CFUs), respectively; p < 0.05). 
This was most distinct in the comparison between PDs and their owners (3.75log10 
and 5.25log10 CFUs; p < 0.05); the numbers were similar between ADs and their 
users (3.09log10 and 4.58log10 CFUs; p = 0.2). C. difficile was found on one 
(4%) AD user's shoe soles. Moreover, 81% of AD users had been denied access with 
their current AD once or several times, the main reason being hygiene. The 
results of the visibly and invisibly disabled were significantly different. The 
number of AD users as opposed to the total number of hospital visitors was 0.03% 
in one hospital and is estimated to be 0.02% in the Netherlands. (5) 
Conclusions: The general hygiene of dogs' paws is far better than that of shoe 
soles, mostly demonstrated by the better general hygiene of PD paws compared 
with their owners' shoe soles; ADs and their users had comparable levels of 
general hygiene. In addition, the number of AD users amongst the total number of 
hospital visitors in the Netherlands is very limited. Thus, hygiene measures to 
reduce any contamination due to dog paws do not seem necessary.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph18020513
PMCID: PMC7827110
PMID: 33435167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


329. J Infect Dis. 2014 Jan 1;209(1):83-6. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jit426. Epub 2013 Aug 
9.

Importance of toxin A, toxin B, and CDT in virulence of an epidemic Clostridium 
difficile strain.

Kuehne SA(1), Collery MM, Kelly ML, Cartman ST, Cockayne A, Minton NP.

Author information:
(1)Clostridia Research Group, Nottingham Digestive Diseases Centre, NIHR 
Biomedical Research Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Nottingham, 
United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 2014 Jan 1;209(1):9-11.

Clostridium difficile infection is the main cause of healthcare-acquired 
diarrhea in the developed world. In addition to the main virulence factors toxin 
A and B, epidemic, PCR Ribotype 027 strains, such as R20291, produce a third 
toxin, CDT. To develop effective medical countermeasures, it is important to 
understand the importance of each toxin. Accordingly, we created all possible 
combinations of isogenic toxin mutants of R20291 and assessed their virulence. 
We demonstrated that either toxin A or toxin B alone can cause fulminant disease 
in the hamster infection model and present tantalizing data that C. difficile 
toxin may also contribute to virulence.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jit426
PMCID: PMC3864386
PMID: 23935202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Infect Immun. 2017 Sep 20;85(10):e00430-17. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00430-17. Print 
2017 Oct.

Transforming Growth Factor β1/SMAD Signaling Pathway Activation Protects the 
Intestinal Epithelium from Clostridium difficile Toxin A-Induced Damage.

Tinoco-Veras CM(1)(2)(3), Santos AAQA(1), Stipursky J(2), Meloni M(2), Araujo 
APB(2), Foschetti DA(1), López-Ureña D(4), Quesada-Gómez C(4), Leitão RFC(1), 
Gomes FCA(5), Brito GAC(6).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Morfologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal do 
Ceará, Fortaleza, Brazil.
(2)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade Federal do Piauí, Piauí, 
Brazil.
(4)Laboratorio de Investigación en Bacteriología Anaerobia, Facultad de 
Microbiología, and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades Tropicales, 
Universidad de Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica.
(5)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil fgomes@icb.ufrj.br gerlybrito@hotmail.com.
(6)Departamento de Morfologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal do 
Ceará, Fortaleza, Brazil fgomes@icb.ufrj.br gerlybrito@hotmail.com.

Clostridium difficile, the main cause of diarrhea in hospitalized patients, 
produces toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB), which affect intestinal epithelial cell 
survival, proliferation, and migration and induce an intense inflammatory 
response. Transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) is a pleiotropic cytokine 
affecting enterocyte and immune/inflammatory responses. However, it has been 
shown that exposure of intestinal epithelium to a low concentration of TcdA 
induces the release of TGF-β1, which has a protective effect on epithelial 
resistance and a TcdA/TGF-β signaling pathway interaction. The activation of 
this pathway in vivo has not been elucidated. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the role of the TGF-β1 pathway in TcdA-induced damage in a rat 
intestinal epithelial cell line (IEC-6) and in a mouse model of an ileal loop. 
TcdA increased the expression of TGF-β1 and its receptor, TβRII, in vitro and in 
vivo TcdA induced nuclear translocation of the transcription factors SMAD2/3, a 
hallmark of TGF-β1 pathway activation, both in IEC cells and in mouse ileal 
tissue. The addition of recombinant TGF-β1 (rTGF-β) prevented TcdA-induced 
apoptosis/necrosis and restored proliferation and repair activity in IEC-6 cells 
in the presence of TcdA. Together, these data show that TcdA induces TGF-β1 
signaling pathway activation and suggest that this pathway might play a 
protective role against the effect of C. difficile-toxin.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00430-17
PMCID: PMC5607421
PMID: 28784928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Aug;57(8):4039-41. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00304-13. 
Epub 2013 May 20.

MBX-500 is effective for treatment of Clostridium difficile infection in 
gnotobiotic piglets.

Steele J(1), Zhang Q, Beamer G, Butler M, Bowlin T, Tzipori S.

Author information:
(1)Tufts Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Infectious 
Disease and Global Health, North Grafton, Massachusetts, USA.

The novel antibiotic MBX-500, dosed at 100, 200, or 400 mg/kg twice daily for 7 
days, was evaluated for the treatment of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) 
in the gnotobiotic pig model. MBX-500 increased survival at all doses and at 
high doses improved clinical signs and reduced lesion severity, similar to 
vancomycin. Our results show that MBX-500 is an effective antibiotic for the 
treatment of diarrhea associated with CDI and prevents severe systemic disease.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00304-13
PMCID: PMC3719748
PMID: 23689716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Infect Dis. 1980 Jan;141(1):92-7. doi: 10.1093/infdis/141.1.92.

Binding of Clostridium difficile cytotoxin and vancomycin by anion-exchange 
resins.

Taylor NS, Bartlett JG.

Cholestyramine and colestipol were tested for binding of Clostridium difficile 
cytotoxin with use of batch absorption and column chromatography. The toxin was 
bound by both resins and could not be eluted from cholestyramine with either an 
ionic of a pH gradient. Vancomycin bound to cholestyramine more strongly than to 
colestipol. Cholestyramine and vancomycin were also tested for therapeutic 
efficacy in the hamster model of clindamycin-induced cecitis. Both compounds 
delayed death and reduced levels of cytotoxin in stool; these effects were 
greatest for vancomycin. Use of the two compounds in combination reduced 
concentrations of biologically active vancomycin in stool, but the levels still 
exceeded the minimum inhibitory concentration for C. difficile. These data 
suggest that the therapeutic benefit of cholestyramine in some patients with 
antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis is due to its binding of the C. 
difficile cytotoxin. Since anion-exchange resins also bind vancomycin, caution 
is necessary if resins are used concurrently with vancomycin for therapy.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/141.1.92
PMID: 7365273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46966. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046966. Epub 2012 Oct 
10.

Succession in the gut microbiome following antibiotic and antibody therapies for 
Clostridium difficile.

Peterfreund GL(1), Vandivier LE, Sinha R, Marozsan AJ, Olson WC, Zhu J, Bushman 
FD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America.

Antibiotic disruption of the intestinal microbiota may cause susceptibility to 
pathogens that is resolved by progressive bacterial outgrowth and colonization. 
Succession is central to ecological theory but not widely documented in studies 
of the vertebrate microbiome. Here, we study succession in the hamster gut after 
treatment with antibiotics and exposure to Clostridium difficile. C. difficile 
infection is typically lethal in hamsters, but protection can be conferred with 
neutralizing antibodies against the A and B toxins. We compare treatment with 
neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAb) to treatment with vancomycin, which 
prolongs the lives of animals but ultimately fails to protect them from death. 
We carried out longitudinal deep sequencing analysis and found distinctive waves 
of succession associated with each form of treatment. Clindamycin sensitization 
prior to infection was associated with the temporary suppression of the 
previously dominant Bacteroidales and the fungus Saccinobaculus in favor of 
Proteobacteria. In mAb-treated animals, C. difficile proliferated before joining 
Proteobacteria in giving way to re-expanding Bacteroidales and the fungus 
Wickerhamomyces. However, the Bacteroidales lineages returning by day 7 were 
different from those that were present initially, and they persisted for the 
duration of the experiment. Animals treated with vancomycin showed a different 
set of late-stage lineages that were dominated by Proteobacteria as well as 
increased disparity between the tissue-associated and luminal cecal communities. 
The control animals showed no change in their gut microbiota. These data thus 
suggest different patterns of ecological succession following antibiotic 
treatment and C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046966
PMCID: PMC3468616
PMID: 23071679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Authors AM and WO are or 
have been employees of Progenics, developer of the antitoxin antibody used in 
this study. Progenics has submitted patent applications for these antibodies. 
Progenics contracted Ricerca to carry out the animal experimentation on their 
behalf. The project was designed by the authors' lab and author AM from 
Progenics with input on feasibility and cost from Ricerca. All animal handling, 
infection, and sample generation were carried out by Ricerca as directed by AM 
and Progenics. There are no products in development or marketed products to 
declare. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies 
on sharing data and materials.


334. J Clin Microbiol. 1994 Jul;32(7):1629-33. doi: 10.1128/JCM.32.7.1629-1633.1994.

Rapid detection of toxigenic Clostridium difficile in fecal samples by magnetic 
immuno PCR assay.

Wolfhagen MJ(1), Fluit AC, Torensma R, Poppelier MJ, Verhoef J.

Author information:
(1)Eijkman-Winkler Laboratory for Medical Microbiology, University Hospital 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Rapid detection of toxigenic Clostridium difficile in fecal samples was 
accomplished with the magnetic immuno PCR assay (MIPA). Elaborate DNA extraction 
techniques were unnecessary. First, we generated a mouse monoclonal antibody 
(MAb) reactive with only C. difficile, Clostridium sordellii, and Clostridium 
bifermentans. Then, magnetic beads were coated with the MAb, incubated with 
fecal samples to allow binding with C. difficile, extracted from the stool with 
a magnet, and processed in the PCR with primers specific for the toxin B gene. 
After optimizing MIPA by raising the number of PCR cycles from 35 to 40 and 
adding Chelex 100 to the PCR mixture, we found a sensitivity of 96.7%, a 
specificity of 100%, a positive predictive value of 100%, and a negative 
predictive value of 94.1% when compared with the culture of cytotoxic C. 
difficile from fecal samples. MIPA is a rapid, easy, and sensitive PCR method 
for demonstrating the presence of toxigenic C. difficile in stool samples and 
avoids the disadvantage of elaborate extraction of DNA from fecal samples.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.32.7.1629-1633.1994
PMCID: PMC263744
PMID: 7929748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Infect Immun. 2012 Oct;80(10):3521-32. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00224-12. Epub 2012 Jul 
30.

Modulation of toxin production by the flagellar regulon in Clostridium 
difficile.

Aubry A(1), Hussack G, Chen W, KuoLee R, Twine SM, Fulton KM, Foote S, Carrillo 
CD, Tanha J, Logan SM.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biological Sciences, National Research Council of Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

We show in this study that toxin production in Clostridium difficile is altered 
in cells which can no longer form flagellar filaments. The impact of 
inactivation of fliC, CD0240, fliF, fliG, fliM, and flhB-fliR flagellar genes 
upon toxin levels in culture supernatants was assessed using cell-based 
cytotoxicity assay, proteomics, immunoassay, and immunoblotting approaches. Each 
of these showed that toxin levels in supernatants were significantly increased 
in a fliC mutant compared to that in the C. difficile 630 parent strain. In 
contrast, the toxin levels in supernatants secreted from other flagellar mutants 
were significantly reduced compared with that in the parental C. difficile 630 
strain. Transcriptional analysis of the pathogenicity locus genes (tcdR, tcdB, 
tcdE, and tcdA) revealed a significant increase of all four genes in the fliC 
mutant strain, while transcription of all four genes was significantly reduced 
in fliM, fliF, fliG, and flhB-fliR mutants. These results demonstrate that toxin 
transcription in C. difficile is modulated by the flagellar regulon. More 
significantly, mutant strains showed a corresponding change in virulence 
compared to the 630 parent strain when tested in a hamster model of C. difficile 
infection. This is the first demonstration of differential flagellum-related 
transcriptional regulation of toxin production in C. difficile and provides 
evidence for elaborate regulatory networks for virulence genes in C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00224-12
PMCID: PMC3457548
PMID: 22851750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Zoonoses Public Health. 2008 Oct;55(8-10):470-80. doi: 
10.1111/j.1863-2378.2008.01145.x.

Evaluation of the risks of shedding Salmonellae and other potential pathogens by 
therapy dogs fed raw diets in Ontario and Alberta.

Lefebvre SL(1), Reid-Smith R, Boerlin P, Weese JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Medicine, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada.

Dogs that participate in animal-assisted interventions (AAIs), often called 
'therapy dogs', commonly interact with humans whose immune systems are not 
functioning optimally. The advisability of feeding raw meat (including poultry) 
to these animals remains a highly contentious issue, in spite of increasing 
evidence that raw meat is frequently contaminated with Salmonella. We set out to 
determine if consuming raw meat influences the risk of therapy dogs shedding 
Salmonella and other pathogens. Two hundred healthy therapy dogs from Ontario 
and Alberta were enrolled. Between May 2005 and November 2006, fecal specimens 
were collected from each dog every 2 months for 1 year, along with a log of 
places visited, antimicrobial use within the home, dog health status and diet. 
Specimens were cultured for Salmonella, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA), vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE), extended-spectrum 
cephalosporinase (ESC) Escherichia coli and Clostridium difficile. Forty (20%) 
of the dogs were reported to have been fed raw meat at some point during the 
year. The incidence rate of Salmonella shedding in the raw meat-fed dogs was 
0.61 cases/dog-year, compared with 0.08 cases/dog-year in dogs that were not fed 
raw meat (P<0.001). Controlling for therapy dog group, the repeated measures, 
and pig ear consumption and diarrhoea in the 2 months prior to specimen 
submission, dogs that consumed raw meat were significantly more likely to test 
positive for Salmonella at least once during the year than dogs that did not eat 
raw meat [odds ratio (OR) 22.7; 95% confidence interval (CI) 3.1-58.8; P<0.001]. 
Specific Salmonella serovars were more common among dogs that consumed raw meat 
versus those that did not include S. Typhimurium, S. Heidelberg and S. Kentucky. 
Raw meat consumption was also significantly associated with shedding ESC E. coli 
(OR 17.2; 95% CI 9.4-32.3). No associations between C. difficile, MRSA or VRE 
and consumption of raw meat were detected. We recommend that dogs fed raw meat 
should be excluded from AAI programmes, particularly when the programmes involve 
interaction with humans at high risk of infection or adverse sequelae 
attributable to infection. Furthermore, although AAI dogs may not be 
representative of the general population of dogs, we also recommend that feeding 
of raw meat to dogs is to be avoided in homes where immunocompromised people 
live.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2008.01145.x
PMID: 18811908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Infect Immun. 1987 Jan;55(1):35-43. doi: 10.1128/IAI.55.1.35-43.1987.

Purification and characterization of Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin and 
cross-reactivity with Clostridium difficile cytotoxin.

Popoff MR.

Lethal toxin (LT) was purified from Clostridium sordellii IP82 by 
DEAE-Trisacryl, Ultrogel AcA3-4 gel filtration, and hydroxyapatite column 
chromatography. The molecular weight of purified LT was estimated to be 240,000 
to 250,000, and the pI was at pH 4.55. LT was lethal for mice by intraperitoneal 
injection (3.4 X 10(5) mouse lethal doses per mg of protein), cytotoxic for Vero 
cells (6.1 X 10(4) cytotoxic units per mg of protein), erythematous and 
edematous by intradermal injection in guinea pigs, and induced a moderate fluid 
accumulation in the guinea pig intestinal loop test. The lethal activity was 
inactivated by N-bromosuccinimide, N-chlorosuccinimide, chloramine-T, and sodium 
dodecyl sulfate. The data suggest that tryptophan and methionine residues 
present in the toxin are important for lethal activity. Furthermore, LT was 
inactivated by oxidized glutathione and activated by dithiothreitol. 
Inactivation by sulfhydryl-group reagents 5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) 
and iodoacetamide was only obtained with dithiothreitol-treated LT. Thiol groups 
which are protected as a disulfide bond(s) seem to be essential for the LT 
activity. A specific antiserum against LT neutralized the biological activities 
of LT and also cytotoxic activity and lethal activity of Clostridium difficile 
toxin B but not of C. difficile toxin A. However, this serum did not recognize 
antigen from C. difficile culture supernatant by immunoblotting. It was 
concluded that antibodies prepared from C. sordellii LT that neutralized C. 
difficile cytotoxic activity recognized a low number of epitopes or tertiary 
structures of C. difficile cytotoxin.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.55.1.35-43.1987
PMCID: PMC260277
PMID: 3793234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):32888-32896. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.162743. Epub 
2010 Aug 9.

Clostridium difficile toxin A decreases acetylation of tubulin, leading to 
microtubule depolymerization through activation of histone deacetylase 6, and 
this mediates acute inflammation.

Nam HJ(1), Kang JK(1), Kim SK(1), Ahn KJ(2), Seok H(3), Park SJ(4), Chang JS(1), 
Pothoulakis C(5), Lamont JT(6), Kim H(7).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin 
University, Pocheon, Gyeonggido 487-711, Korea.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology Research Institute, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul 102-752, Korea.
(3)School of Nano-Biotechnology and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National 
Institute of Science and Technology, Ulsan 689-798, Korea.
(4)Department of Veterinary Histology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook 
National University, Taeku 702-701, Korea.
(5)Division of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California 90095.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.
(7)From the Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin 
University, Pocheon, Gyeonggido 487-711, Korea. Electronic address: 
hokim@daejin.ac.kr.

Clostridium difficile toxin A is known to cause actin disaggregation through the 
enzymatic inactivation of intracellular Rho proteins. Based on the rapid and 
severe cell rounding of toxin A-exposed cells, we speculated that toxin A may be 
involved in post-translational modification of tubulin, leading to microtubule 
instability. In the current study, we observed that toxin A strongly reduced 
α-tubulin acetylation in human colonocytes and mouse intestine. Fractionation 
analysis demonstrated that toxin A-induced α-tubulin deacetylation yielded 
monomeric tubulin, indicating the presence of microtubule depolymerization. 
Inhibition of the glucosyltransferase activity against Rho proteins of toxin A 
by UDP-2',3'-dialdehyde significantly abrogated toxin A-induced α-tubulin 
deacetylation. In colonocytes treated with trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of 
the HDAC6 tubulin deacetylase, toxin A-induced α-tubulin deacetylation and loss 
of tight junction were completely blocked. Administration of TSA also attenuated 
proinflammatory cytokine production, mucosal damage, and epithelial cell 
apoptosis in mouse intestine exposed to toxin A. These results suggest that 
toxin A causes microtubule depolymerization by activation of HDAC6-mediated 
tubulin deacetylation. Indeed, blockage of HDAC6 by TSA markedly attenuates 
α-tubulin deacetylation, proinflammatory cytokine production, and mucosal damage 
in a toxin A-induced mouse enteritis model. Tubulin deacetylation is an 
important component of the intestinal inflammatory cascade following toxin 
A-mediated Rho inactivation in vitro and in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M110.162743
PMCID: PMC2963380
PMID: 20696758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Physiol. 2002 Feb 15;539(Pt 1):295-308. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2001.013117.

Rho and rho kinase modulation of barrier properties: cultured endothelial cells 
and intact microvessels of rats and mice.

Adamson RH(1), Curry FE, Adamson G, Liu B, Jiang Y, Aktories K, Barth H, 
Daigeler A, Golenhofen N, Ness W, Drenckhahn D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Physiology, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, 
USA.

Previous experiments using cultured endothelial monolayers indicate that 
Rho-family small GTPases are involved in modulation of endothelial monolayer 
permeability by regulating assembly of the cellular actin filament scaffold, 
activity of myosin-based contractility and junctional distribution of the 
Ca2+-dependent endothelial cell adhesion molecule, VE-cadherin. We investigated 
these mechanisms using both cultured endothelial cells (from porcine pulmonary 
artery and mouse heart) and vascular endothelium in situ (mouse aorta, and 
individually perfused venular microvessels of mouse and rat mesentery). Exposure 
to Clostridium difficile toxin B (100 ng x ml(-1)) inactivated 50-90% of all 
endothelial Rho proteins within 60-90 min. This was accompanied by considerable 
reduction of actin filament stress fibres and junctional F-actin in cultured 
endothelial monolayers and in mouse aortic endothelium in situ. Also, 
VE-cadherin became discontinuous along endothelial junctions. Inhibition of Rho 
kinase with Y-27632 (30 microM) for 90-120 min induced F-actin reduction both in 
vitro and in situ but did not cause redistribution or reduction of VE-cadherin 
staining. Perfusion of microvessels with toxin B increased basal hydraulic 
permeability (L(p)) but did not attenuate the transient increase in L(p) of 
microvessels exposed to bradykinin. Perfusion of microvessels with Y-27632 (30 
microM) for up to 100 min reduced basal L(p) but did not attenuate the 
permeability increase induced by platelet activating factor (PAF) or bradykinin. 
These results show that toxin B-mediated reduction of endothelial barrier 
properties is due to inactivation of small GTPases other than RhoA. Rho proteins 
as well as RhoA-mediated contractile mechanisms are not involved in bradykinin- 
or PAF-induced hyperpermeability of intact microvessels.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2001.013117
PMCID: PMC2290121
PMID: 11850521 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Am J Physiol. 1997 Aug;273(2 Pt 1):G333-41. doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.1997.273.2.G333.

IL-11 inhibits Clostridium difficile toxin A enterotoxicity in rat ileum.

Castagliuolo I(1), Kelly CP, Qiu BS, Nikulasson ST, LaMont JT, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston 02215, USA.

Interleukin-11 (IL-11) is a stromal cell-derived cytokine with several 
biological activities against hematopoietic cells. Recent results indicated that 
IL-11 reduced mucosal damage in animal models of colitis. This study aimed to 
explore the action of recombinant human IL-11 (rhIL-11) on the intestinal 
effects of Clostridium difficile toxin A, an inflammatory enterotoxin, and 
cholera toxin, a noninflammatory enterotoxin in rat ileum. We administered 
rhIL-11 subcutaneously to rats before injection of toxin A into ileal loops and 
measured fluid secretion, epithelial permeability to mannitol, histopathological 
damage, and release of rat mast cell protease II (RMCP II) from intestinal mast 
cells and of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and macrophage inflammatory 
protein-2 (MIP-2) from lamina propria macrophages. rhIL-11 (50-1,000 
micrograms/kg) inhibited toxin A but not cholera toxin-mediated secretion and 
permeability in a dose-dependent fashion and reduced toxin A-induced epithelial 
cell damage. Rats treated with rhIL-11 also showed reduced RMCP II, TNF-alpha, 
and MIP-2 release in response to toxin A. Exposure of rat peripheral monocytes 
in vitro to rhIL-11 (1 microgram/ml) inhibited lipopolysaccharide and toxin 
A-mediated increases in TNF-alpha mRNA and protein levels. We conclude that 
rhIL-11 blocks the intestinal effects of C. difficile toxin A, possibly by 
inhibiting release of inflammatory mediators from mucosal mast cells and 
intestinal macrophages.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.1997.273.2.G333
PMID: 9277411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Infect Immun. 2007 Feb;75(2):801-9. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01705-06. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Difference in the cytotoxic effects of toxin B from Clostridium difficile strain 
VPI 10463 and toxin B from variant Clostridium difficile strain 1470.

Huelsenbeck J(1), Dreger S, Gerhard R, Barth H, Just I, Genth H.

Author information:
(1)Institut of Toxicology, Medical School, Hannover, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

Glucosylation of RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42 by Clostridium difficile toxin B from 
strain VPI 10463 (TcdB) results in actin reorganization (cytopathic effect) and 
apoptosis (cytotoxic effect). Toxin B from variant C. difficile strain 1470 
serotype F (TcdBF) differs from TcdB with regard to substrate proteins, as it 
glucosylates Rac1 and R-Ras but not RhoA and Cdc42. In this study, we addressed 
the question of whether the cellular effects of the toxins depend on their 
protein substrate specificity. Rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) cells were 
synchronized using the thymidine double-block technique. We show that cells were 
most sensitive to the cytotoxic effect of TcdB in S phase, as analyzed in terms 
of phosphatidyl serine externalization, fragmentation of nuclei, and activation 
of caspase-3; in contrast, TcdBF induced only a marginal cytotoxic effect, 
suggesting that inactivation of RhoA (but not of Rac1) was required for the 
cytotoxic effect. The glucosylation of Rac1 was correlated to the cytopathic 
effect of either toxin, suggesting a close connection of the two effects. The 
cytotoxic effect of TcdB was executed by caspase-3, as it was responsive to 
inhibition by acetyl-Asp-Met-Gln-Asp-aldehyde (Ac-DMQD-CHO), an inhibitor of 
caspase-3. The viability of TcdB-treated RBL cells was reduced, whereas the 
viability of TcdBF-treated cells was unchanged, further confirming that 
inactivation of RhoA is required for the cytotoxic effect. In conclusion, the 
protein substrate specificity of the glucosylating toxins determines their 
biological activity.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01705-06
PMCID: PMC1828479
PMID: 17145947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Med Microbiol Immunol. 1981;169(3):187-96. doi: 10.1007/BF02123592.

Presence of Clostridium difficile toxin in guinea pigs with 
penicillin-associated colitis.

Rothman SW.

Cecal filtrates from guinea pigs treated with penicillin contained a toxin which 
produced cytotoxic changes in HeLa cell cultures and was lethal to guinea pigs 
when administered intracecally. The cytotoxicity could be neutralized by 
Clostridium difficile and C. sordellii antitoxins, but not by other clostridial 
antitoxins. Rabbit immunization with toxic cecal extracts produced antibody 
which neutralized the cytotoxicity of guinea pig cecal extracts, of stool 
extracts from humans with antibiotic-associated colitis and of culture 
supernatant fluids of C. difficile. Treatment with vancomycin reduced the number 
of deaths and increased the survival time of penicillin-treated animals. No 
cytotoxin was present in cecal extracts from these guinea pigs. Gram-negative 
bacteremia was present in half the penicillin-treated animals, the sick ones as 
well as the healthy ones. Treatment with vancomycin did not decrease the 
incidence of bacteremia. Gram-negative bacteremia and changes in fecal flora 
were observed in some antibiotic-treated guinea pigs; all diseased animals, 
however, contained this cytotoxin. C. difficile was isolated from cecal contents 
of sick animals and these isolates produced the cytotoxin in vitro. The results 
suggest that C. difficile toxin can cause antibiotic-associated colitis in 
guinea pigs.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02123592
PMID: 7254132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Vet Rec. 2013 Dec 21;173(24):607. doi: 10.1136/vr.101960. Epub 2013 Dec 13.

Postoperative Clostridium difficile infection with PCR ribotype 078 strain 
identified at necropsy in five Thoroughbred racehorses.

Niwa H(1), Kato H, Hobo S, Kinoshita Y, Ueno T, Katayama Y, Hariu K, Oku K, 
Senoh M, Kuroda T, Nakai K.

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Division, Epizootic Research Center, Equine Research Institute, 
Japan Racing Association, Shiba 1400-4, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0412, Japan.

Clostridium difficile is an important cause of acute enterocolitis in horses. We 
describe five cases of C difficile infection occurring postoperatively in 
Thoroughbred racehorses. Following diarrhoea or colic accompanied by a marked 
increase in packed cell volume (to ≥60 per cent) and leucopenia (≤4000 cells/μl) 
within two to four days after surgery in all five horses, four of them died or 
were euthanased because of colitis or severe diarrhoea. In these four horses, 
necrotising entero-typhlo-colitis was revealed by postmortem examination, and C 
difficile was recovered from the contents of the small and/or large intestine. 
The remaining horse was euthanased because of marked decline in general 
condition and the presence of a lung abscess, from which C difficile was 
isolated. The horse had had severe postoperative diarrhoea before the onset of 
respiratory disorder; laboratory tests for C difficile were not performed on the 
faeces. All C difficile isolates were toxin-A-positive, toxin-B-positive and 
actin-specific ADP-ribosyltransferase (CDT)-positive. The isolates were 
indistinguishable by pulsed field gel electrophoresis analysis, PCR ribotyping, 
and slpA sequence typing, and the slpA sequences and PCR ribotype patterns were 
identical to those of known PCR type 078. This case sequence might have been 
healthcare-associated infection, although there was about a four-month interval 
between each disease onset.

DOI: 10.1136/vr.101960
PMID: 24336792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Med Microbiol. 2013 Sep;62(Pt 9):1394-1404. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.056796-0. Epub 
2013 Mar 21.

Systemic antibody responses induced by a two-component Clostridium difficile 
toxoid vaccine protect against C. difficile-associated disease in hamsters.

Anosova NG(1), Brown AM(1), Li L(1), Liu N(1), Cole LE(1), Zhang J(1), Mehta 
H(1), Kleanthous H(1).

Author information:
(1)Sanofi Pasteur Biologics, 38 Sidney Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) has been identified as the leading cause 
of nosocomial diarrhoea and pseudomembranous colitis associated with antibiotic 
therapy. Recent epidemiological changes as well as increases in the number of 
outbreaks of strains associated with increased virulence and higher mortality 
rates underscore the importance of identifying alternatives to antibiotics to 
manage this important disease. Animal studies have clearly demonstrated the 
roles that toxins A and B play in gut inflammation as well as diarrhoea; 
therefore it is not surprising that serum anti-toxin A and B IgG are associated 
with protection against recurrent CDI. In humans, strong humoral toxin-specific 
immune responses elicited by natural C. difficile infection is associated with 
recovery and lack of disease recurrence, whereas insufficient humoral responses 
are associated with recurrent CDI. The first generation of C. difficile vaccine 
that contained inactivated toxin A and B was found to be completely protective 
against death and diarrhoea in the hamster C. difficile challenge model. When 
tested in young healthy volunteers in Phase I clinical trials, this 
investigational vaccine was shown to be safe and immunogenic. Moreover, in a 
separate study this vaccine was able to prevent further relapses in three out of 
three patients who had previously suffered from chronic relapsing C. 
difficile-associated diarrhoea. Herein we examined the immunogenicity and 
protective activity of a next-generation Sanofi Pasteur two-component highly 
purified toxoid vaccine in a C. difficile hamster model. This model is widely 
recognized as a stringent and relevant choice for the evaluation of novel 
treatment strategies against C. difficile and was used in preclinical testing of 
the first-generation vaccine candidate. Intramuscular (i.m.) immunizations with 
increasing doses of this adjuvanted toxoid vaccine protected hamsters from 
mortality and disease symptoms in a dose-dependent manner. ELISA measurements of 
pre-challenge sera showed that the median anti-toxin A and anti-toxin B IgG 
titres in the group of surviving animals were significantly higher than the 
median values in the group of animals that did not survive challenge. Assessment 
of the neutralizing activity of these sera revealed a statistically significant 
difference between the levels of both toxin A and toxin B neutralizing titres in 
protected versus unprotected animals as the median anti-toxin A and anti-toxin B 
neutralizing titres from surviving animals were higher than the median values 
from animals that succumbed to challenge. Statistically significant correlations 
between the toxin-specific binding titres and toxin neutralizing titres were 
seen for both toxin A and toxin B responses. The role of circulating anti-toxin 
antibodies in immunity against disease was evaluated by passive transfer of 
immune sera against C. difficile toxoids to naïve hamsters. Passively immunized 
animals were protected against morbidity and mortality associated with C. 
difficile challenge. Taken together, these results indicate the ability of i.m. 
immunization with inactivated toxins A and B to induce robust dose-dependent 
anti-toxin A and anti-toxin B IgG responses, the principal role of circulating 
anti-toxin antibody in immunity against disease and that antibody toxin binding 
and neutralization titres can serve as correlates of protection in the hamster 
challenge model of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.056796-0
PMID: 23518659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. APMIS. 2003 Oct;111(10):969-77. doi: 10.1034/j.1600-0463.2003.1111009.x.

Cholera toxin protects against action by Clostridium difficile toxin A. The role 
of antisecretory factor in intestinal secretion and inflammation in rat.

Lönnroth I(1), Lange S, Jennische E, Johansson E, Jonson I, Torres J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Clinical Bacteriology, Anatomy and Cell 
Biology, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, Sweden. Ivar.Lonnroth@microbio.gu.se

The protein antisecretory factor (AF) inhibits intestinal fluid secretion 
induced by the cholera toxin (CT) and Clostridium difficile toxin A (CDA). The 
present work investigated whether CT-induced AF protects against the enterotoxin 
action by CDA. Rats were pretreated perorally with CT or buffer as control, 
whereafter CDA-induced fluid secretion and cytotoxicity was tested in vivo in 
ligated intestinal loops; the mucosal level of AF was estimated using the 
Western blot technique. Rats given repeated peroral doses of CT became tolerant 
to CDA, the inhibition of fluid secretion and of cytotoxicity being 79% in eight 
out of nine animals. The repeated CT-treatment also induced long-lasting rise of 
AF in the mucosal epithelium. Recombinant AF given either perorally or 
intravenously inhibited both fluid secretion and cytotoxicity by CDA; similar 
results were obtained with a truncated 16-mer AF peptide.
IN CONCLUSION: peroral CT-treatment induced tolerance to CDA in rat small 
intestine. The tolerance was probably mediated by AF induced via action of 
cholera toxin on the enteric nervous and immune system.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0463.2003.1111009.x
PMID: 14616550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Gut Pathog. 2016 Apr 1;8:11. doi: 10.1186/s13099-016-0095-3. eCollection 2016.

Complete genome sequence of Peptoclostridium difficile strain Z31.

Pereira FL(1), Oliveira Júnior CA(2), Silva ROS(2), Dorella FA(1), Carvalho 
AF(1), Almeida GMF(1), Leal CAG(1), Lobato FCF(#)(2), Figueiredo HCP(#)(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)National Reference Laboratory for Aquatic Animal Diseases (AQUACEN), Ministry 
of Fisheries and Aquaculture, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo 
Horizonte, Brazil.
(2)Veterinary School, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 
Brazil.
(3)Department of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, School of Veterinary, Federal 
University of Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos 6627, Pampulha, 30161-970 Belo 
Horizonte, MG Brazil.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Peptoclostridium (Clostridium) difficile is a spore-forming 
bacterium responsible for nosocomial infections in humans. It is recognized as 
an important agent of diarrhea and colitis in several animal species and a 
possible zoonotic agent. Despite the known importance of P. difficile infection 
in humans and animals, no vaccine or other effective measure to control the 
disease is commercially available. A possible alternative treatment for P. 
difficile infection is the use of a nontoxigenic strain of P. difficile as a 
competitive exclusion agent. However, a thorough knowledge of this strain is 
necessary for this purpose. We selected P. difficile Z31, a nontoxigenic strain 
(PCR ribotype 009), for investigation because it prevents P. difficile infection 
in a hamster model.
RESULTS: The genome sequence of P. difficile Z31 is a circular chromosome of 
4298,263 bp, with a 29.21 % GC content, encoding 4128 proteins, and containing 
78 pseudogenes. This strain belongs to ST 3, clade 1, and has five phage regions 
in its genome. Genes responsible for resistance to tetracycline and erythromycin 
were detected and more importantly, Z31 also contains genes that promote spore 
production and stability, cell attachment, intestinal adherence, and biofilm 
formation.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we present the first complete genome sequence of 
nontoxigenic P. difficile strain Z31. When the Z31 genome was compared with 
those of other isolates available in GenBank, including a draft genome of a 
nontoxigenic strain, several unique regions were evident. Z31 contains no toxin 
genes, but encodes several non-toxin virulence factors, which may favor host 
colonization.

DOI: 10.1186/s13099-016-0095-3
PMCID: PMC5562067
PMID: 28828039


347. Ai Zheng. 2003 Jul;22(7):719-24.

Comparative study on apoptosis induction of SMMC7721 and Vero cells by 
Clostridium difficile toxin A.

Zhao J(1), Wang D, Zhao H, Lin W.

Author information:
(1)The Fifth Department,Medical College of Northwest Minorities University, 
Lanzhou, Gansu, 730000, PR China. gm_zh@21cn.com

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Clostridium difficile is recognized as a frequent cause 
of antibiotic-induced diarrhea. This study was designed to investigate whether 
Clostridium difficile toxin A might induce apoptosis on human hepatoma cell line 
SMMC7721 and African green monkey kidney Vero cells.
METHODS: Highly purified toxin A was obtained by bovine thyroglobulin affinity 
purification followed by ion exchange chromatography on Q sepharose. The 
apoptosis induction of toxin A was examined on SMMC7721 cells with Vero cells as 
a control. Inhibition of proliferation was measured by MTT assay. Morphological 
assessment of apoptosis was performed with fluorescence and electronic 
microscopy. DNA fragmentation was observed by agarose gel electrophoresis. Cell 
cycle distribution was analyzed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Toxin A (0.293-4.690 mg x L(-1) ) inhibited proliferation of SMMC7721 
and Vero cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Morphological 
changes of typical apoptosis showed that SMMC7721 had a higher percentage of 
apoptosis than Vero cells. Agarose gel electrophoresis of DNA from SMMC7721 
treated with toxin A for 48 hours revealed a "ladder" pattern.
CONCLUSION: Clostridium difficile toxin A induced apoptosis of SMMC7721 and Vero 
cells. The apoptosis induction on SMMC7721 cells was more effective than that on 
Vero cells.

PMID: 12866963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. BMC Microbiol. 2012 Jul 2;12:130. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-130.

Analysis of a Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 100 kilobase island reveals 
the presence of a novel transposon, Tn6164.

Corver J(1), Bakker D, Brouwer MS, Harmanus C, Hensgens MP, Roberts AP, Lipman 
LJ, Kuijper EJ, van Leeuwen HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Section Experimental Microbiology, Center 
of Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. j.corver@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile is the main cause of antibiotic associated 
diarrhea. In the past decade, the number of C. difficile patients has increased 
dramatically, coinciding with the emergence of two PCR ribotypes 027 and 078. 
PCR ribotype 078 is also frequently found during C. difficile outbreaks in 
pigfarms. Previously, the genome of the PCR ribotype 078 strain M120, a human 
isolate, was described to contain a unique insert of 100 kilobases.
RESULTS: Analysis of this insert revealed over 90 open reading frames, encoding 
proteins originating from transposons, phages and plasmids. The insert was shown 
to be a transposon (Tn6164), as evidenced by the presence of an excised and 
circularised molecule, containing the ligated 5'and 3'ends of the insert. 
Transfer of the element could not be shown through filter-mating experiments. 
Whole genome sequencing of PCR ribotype 078 strain 31618, isolated from a 
diarrheic piglet, showed that Tn6164 was not present in this strain. To test the 
prevalence of Tn6164, a collection of 231 Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 
isolates from human (n = 173) and porcine (n = 58) origin was tested for the 
presence of this element by PCR. The transposon was present in 9 human, 
tetracycline resistant isolates, originating from various countries in Europe, 
and none of the pig strains. Nine other strains, also tetracycline resistant 
human isolates, contained half of the transposon, suggesting multiple insertion 
steps yielding the full Tn6164. Other PCR ribotypes (n = 66) were all negative 
for the presence of the transposon. Multi locus variable tandem repeat analysis 
revealed genetic relatedness among transposon containing isolates. Although the 
element contained several potential antibiotic resistance genes, it did not 
yield a readily distinguishable phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Tn6164 is a newly described transposon, occurring sporadically in 
C. difficile PCR ribotype 078 strains. Although no transfer of the element could 
be shown, we hypothesize that the element could serve as a reservoir of 
antibiotic resistance genes for other bacteria. Further research is needed to 
investigate the transfer capabilities of the element and to substantiate the 
possible role of Tn6164 as a source of antibiotic resistance genes for other gut 
pathogens.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-130
PMCID: PMC3485107
PMID: 22747711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Immunol. 1998 Jun 15;160(12):6039-45.

Clostridium difficile toxin A stimulates macrophage-inflammatory protein-2 
production in rat intestinal epithelial cells.

Castagliuolo I(1), Keates AC, Wang CC, Pasha A, Valenick L, Kelly CP, Nikulasson 
ST, LaMont JT, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Neutrophil infiltration of the colonic mucosa is a hallmark of Clostridium 
difficile toxin A-mediated enterocolitis. Macrophage-inflammatory protein-2 
(MIP-2) is a potent neutrophil chemoattractant secreted by rat macrophages and 
epithelial cells in response to inflammatory stimuli. In this work, we report 
that administration of toxin A into rat ileal loops increased mucosal levels of 
MIP-2 before the onset of fluid secretion and mucosal neutrophil infiltration. 
Administration of rabbit anti-MIP-2 IgG, but not control IgG, reduced toxin 
A-mediated secretion (by 58%), mucosal permeability (by 80%), and 
myeloperoxidase activity (by 85%). Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated 
increased MIP-2 expression in intestinal epithelial and lamina propria cells 1 h 
after toxin A administration. Intestinal epithelial cells purified from toxin 
A-exposed ileal loops also showed increased MIP-2 mRNA expression and MIP-2 
protein release that was inhibited by pretreatment of rats with the 
transcriptional inhibitor actinomycin D. These results indicate that C. 
difficile toxin A induces MIP-2 release from intestinal epithelial cells and 
that MIP-2 contributes to neutrophil mucosal influx during toxin A enteritis.

PMID: 9637520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Infect Immun. 2015 Jan;83(1):405-16. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02550-14. Epub 2014 Nov 
10.

Toxin-mediated paracellular transport of antitoxin antibodies facilitates 
protection against Clostridium difficile infection.

Zhang Z(1), Chen X(2), Hernandez LD(1), Lipari P(1), Flattery A(1), Chen SC(1), 
Kramer S(1), Polishook JD(1), Racine F(1), Cape H(1), Kelly CP(2), Therien 
AG(3).

Author information:
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA 
alex_therien@merck.com.

Erratum in
    Infect Immun. 2015 Dec;83(12):4899.

The exotoxins TcdA and TcdB are the major virulence factors of Clostridium 
difficile. Circulating neutralizing antitoxin antibodies are protective in C. 
difficile infection (CDI), as demonstrated, in part, by the protective effects 
of actoxumab and bezlotoxumab, which bind to and neutralize TcdA and TcdB, 
respectively. The question of how systemic IgG antibodies neutralize toxins in 
the gut lumen remains unresolved, although it has been suggested that the Fc 
receptor FcRn may be involved in active antibody transport across the gut 
epithelium. In this study, we demonstrated that genetic ablation of FcRn and 
excess irrelevant human IgG have no impact on actoxumab-bezlotoxumab-mediated 
protection in murine and hamster models of CDI, suggesting that Fc-dependent 
transport of antibodies across the gut wall is not required for efficacy. Tissue 
distribution studies in hamsters suggest, rather, that the transport of 
antibodies depends on toxin-induced damage to the gut lining. In an in vitro 
two-dimensional culture system that mimics the architecture of the intestinal 
mucosal epithelium, toxins on the apical side of epithelial cell monolayers are 
neutralized by basolateral antibodies, and antibody transport across the cell 
layer is dramatically increased upon addition of toxin to the apical side. 
Similar data were obtained with F(ab')2 fragments, which lack an Fc domain, 
consistent with FcRn-independent paracellular, rather than transcellular, 
transport of antibodies. Kinetic studies show that initial damage caused by 
apical toxin is required for efficient neutralization by basolateral antibodies. 
These data may represent a general mechanism of humoral response-mediated 
protection against enteric pathogens.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.02550-14
PMCID: PMC4288887
PMID: 25385797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Oct;56(10):5023-30. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00057-12. 
Epub 2012 Jul 16.

In vitro and in vivo characterization of CB-183,315, a novel lipopeptide 
antibiotic for treatment of Clostridium difficile.

Mascio CT(1), Mortin LI, Howland KT, Van Praagh AD, Zhang S, Arya A, Chuong CL, 
Kang C, Li T, Silverman JA.

Author information:
(1)Cubist Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Lexington, Massachusetts, USA. 
carmela.mascio@cubist.com

CB-183,315 is a novel lipopeptide antibiotic structurally related to daptomycin 
currently in phase 3 clinical development for Clostridium difficile-associated 
diarrhea (CDAD). We report here the in vitro mechanism of action, spontaneous 
resistance incidence, resistance by serial passage, time-kill kinetics, 
postantibiotic effect, and efficacy of CB-183,315 in a hamster model of lethal 
infection. In vitro data showed that CB-183,315 dissipated the membrane 
potential of Staphylococcus aureus without inducing changes in membrane 
permeability to small molecules. The rate of spontaneous resistance to 
CB-183,315 at 8× the MIC was below the limit of detection in C. difficile. Under 
selective pressure by serial passage with CB-183,315 against C. difficile, the 
susceptibility of the bacteria changed no more than 2-fold during 15 days of 
serial passages. At 16× the MIC, CB-183,315 produced a ≥3-log reduction of C. 
difficile in the time-kill assay. The postantibiotic effect of CB-183,315 at 8× 
the MIC was 0.9 h. At 80× the MIC the postantibiotic effect was more than 6 h. 
In the hamster model of CDAD, CB-183,315 and vancomycin both demonstrated potent 
efficacy in resolving initial disease onset, even at very low doses. After the 
conclusion of dosing, CB-183,315 and vancomycin showed a similar dose- and 
time-dependent pattern with respect to rates of CDAD recurrence.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00057-12
PMCID: PMC3457379
PMID: 22802252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Gastroenterology. 2000 Jul;119(1):139-50. doi: 10.1053/gast.2000.8526.

Clostridium difficile toxin A causes early damage to mitochondria in cultured 
cells.

He D(1), Hagen SJ, Pothoulakis C, Chen M, Medina ND, Warny M, LaMont JT.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The mechanism by which Clostridium difficile toxin A causes 
actin depolymerization and cell rounding involves toxin internalization and 
subsequent monoglucosylation of the Rho family of proteins. This study explored 
toxin internalization and effects on mitochondrial function before cell 
rounding.
METHODS: Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were exposed to toxin A, and 
mitochondrial localization was assayed by confocal microscopy. Mitochondrial 
function was measured by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) concentration, 
mitochondrial permeability, and leakage of cytochrome c.
RESULTS: Confocal microscopy showed toxin A colocalization with the 
mitochondrial protein GRP 75 at 5 minutes after toxin exposure. Between 5 and 15 
minutes, toxin A caused an 80% diminution in cellular ATP levels; cell rounding 
and Rho glucosylation commenced between 15 and 30 minutes. Toxin A also resulted 
in reduction of mitochondrial membrane potential and a 2-3-fold increase in 
reactive oxygen radicals. Preincubation of CHO cells with the antioxidants 
butylated hydroxyanisole or butylated hydroxytoluene blocked the toxin A-induced 
increase in oxygen radicals and diminished cell rounding. Western blot analysis 
of toxin A-exposed isolated mitochondria showed a direct effect of toxin A on 
leakage of cytochrome c.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that extensive mitochondrial damage occurs within 
15 minutes in CHO cells exposed to toxin A. Diminished ATP concentrations and 
increased oxygen radicals are likely to contribute to cytotoxicity from this 
bacterial toxin.

DOI: 10.1053/gast.2000.8526
PMID: 10889163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Vaccine. 2015 Jan 1;33(1):252-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.06.032. Epub 2014 
Jun 18.

Detecting and preventing reversion to toxicity for a formaldehyde-treated C. 
difficile toxin B mutant.

Wang B(1), Wang S(1), Rustandi RR(1), Wang F(1), Mensch CD(1), Hong L(1), 
Kristopeit A(1), Secore S(1), Dornadula G(1), Kanavage A(1), Heinrichs JH(1), 
Mach H(1), Blue JT(1), Thiriot DS(2).

Author information:
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, 770 Sumneytown Pike, West Point, PA 19486, USA.
(2)Merck Research Laboratories, 770 Sumneytown Pike, West Point, PA 19486, USA. 
Electronic address: david_thiriot@merck.com.

The toxicity of Clostridium difficile large clostridial toxin B (TcdB) can be 
reduced by many orders of magnitude by a combination of targeted point 
mutations. However, a TcdB mutant with five point mutations (referred to herein 
as mTcdB) still has residual toxicity that can be detected in cell-based assays 
and in-vivo mouse toxicity assays. This residual toxicity can be effectively 
removed by treatment with formaldehyde in solution. Storage of the 
formaldehyde-treated mTcdB as a liquid can result in reversion over time back to 
the mTcdB level of toxicity, with the rate of reversion dependent on the storage 
temperature. We found that for both the "forward" mTcdB detoxification reaction 
with formaldehyde, and the "reverse" reversion to toxicity reaction, mouse 
toxicity correlated with several biochemical assays including anion exchange 
chromatography retention time and appearance on SDS-PAGE. Maintenance of a low 
concentration of formaldehyde prevents reversion to toxicity in liquid 
formulations. However, when samples with 0.016% (v/v) formaldehyde were 
lyophilized and stored at 37 °C, formaldehyde continued to react with and modify 
the mTcdB in the lyophilized state. Lyophilization alone effectively prevented 
reversion to toxicity for formaldehyde-treated, formaldehyde-removed mTcdB 
samples stored at 37 °C for 6 months. Formaldehyde-treated, formaldehyde-removed 
lyophilized mTcdB showed no evidence of reversion to toxicity, appeared stable 
by several assays, and was immunogenic in mice, even after storage for 6 months 
at 37 °C.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.06.032
PMID: 24951860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Evol Appl. 2020 Jul 23;14(1):198-209. doi: 10.1111/eva.13049. eCollection 2021 
Jan.

Using genetic relatedness to understand heterogeneous distributions of urban 
rat-associated pathogens.

Byers KA(1)(2)(3), Booker TR(2), Combs M(4), Himsworth CG(3)(5)(6), Munshi-South 
J(7), Patrick DM(5)(8), Whitlock MC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Studies University of British Columbia 
Vancouver BC Canada.
(2)Biodiversity Research Centre University of British Columbia Vancouver BC 
Canada.
(3)Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative Animal Health Centre British Columbia 
Ministry of Agriculture Abbotsford BC Canada.
(4)Department of Ecology, Evolution and Environmental Biology Columbia 
University New York NY USA.
(5)School of Population and Public Health University of British Columbia 
Vancouver BC Canada.
(6)Animal Health Centre British Columbia Ministry of Agriculture Abbotsford BC 
Canada.
(7)Louis Calder Center-Biological Field Station and Department of Biological 
Science Fordham University Armonk NY USA.
(8)British Columbia Centre for Disease Control Vancouver BC Canada.

Urban Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) carry several pathogens transmissible to 
people. However, pathogen prevalence can vary across fine spatial scales (i.e., 
by city block). Using a population genomics approach, we sought to describe rat 
movement patterns across an urban landscape and to evaluate whether these 
patterns align with pathogen distributions. We genotyped 605 rats from a single 
neighborhood in Vancouver, Canada, and used 1,495 genome-wide single nucleotide 
polymorphisms to identify parent-offspring and sibling relationships using 
pedigree analysis. We resolved 1,246 pairs of relatives, of which only 1% of 
pairs were captured in different city blocks. Relatives were primarily caught 
within 33 meters of each other leading to a highly leptokurtic distribution of 
dispersal distances. Using binomial generalized linear mixed models, we 
evaluated whether family relationships influenced rat pathogen status with the 
bacterial pathogens Leptospira interrogans, Bartonella tribocorum, and 
Clostridium difficile, and found that an individual's pathogen status was not 
predicted any better by including disease status of related rats. The spatial 
clustering of related rats and their pathogens lends support to the hypothesis 
that spatially restricted movement promotes the heterogeneous patterns of 
pathogen prevalence evidenced in this population. Our findings also highlight 
the utility of evolutionary tools to understand movement and rat-associated 
health risks in urban landscapes.

© 2020 The Authors. Evolutionary Applications published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/eva.13049
PMCID: PMC7819557
PMID: 33519965

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.


355. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2002 Sep;3(3):289-301. doi: 10.1007/s101620020016. Epub 
2002 Feb 27.

Structural microdomains in the lateral plasma membrane of cochlear outer hair 
cells.

Zhang M(1), Kalinec F.

Author information:
(1)Section on Cell Structure and Function, Leslie & Susan Gonda Department of 
Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA.

The basal and lateral regions of the plasma membrane of cochlear outer hair 
cells are structurally and functionally distinct. The lateral region contains 
thousands of motor proteins but few voltage-gated channels. The basal region, 
conversely, contains a high number of voltage-gated channels but is devoid of 
motor proteins. It has been suggested that the cortical cytoskeleton is 
responsible for maintaining this regional distinction. Toward elucidating the 
structure of the outer hair cell's electromotile mechanism, we investigated the 
physical organization of the lateral plasma membrane in living guinea pig outer 
hair cells by analyzing the distribution pattern of the anionic long-chain 
carbocyanine SP-DiIC18(3) within this area, before and after electrical 
stimulation and with an intact and a disrupted cytoskeleton. We observed 
punctate, intensely fluorescent patches as well as areas of weaker fluorescence, 
with clear local maxima and minima, upon labeling the cells with this 
membrane-soluble probe. This discrete distribution of SP-DilC18(3) suggests that 
the lateral plasma membrane of guinea pig outer hair cells may be composed of 
small structural domains (microdomains). Disrupting the cytoskeleton with either 
trypsin or toxin B from Clostridium difficile did not change this pattern of 
distribution, thus indicating that this treatment did not facilitate the lateral 
diffusion of the probes. Electrical stimulation using whole-cell patch-clamp 
techniques, on the other hand, induced two responses: fast motility and 
reversible displacement of the fluorescent probes. Both responses were inhibited 
by internal perfusion with salicylate, while disruption of the cytoskeleton did 
not inhibit OHC fast motility but affected the electrically induced 
redistribution of fluorescent probes. Together, these results suggest that the 
lateral plasma membrane of guinea pig outer hair cells contains structural 
microdomains and that the cytoskeleton does not appear to be playing a major 
role in maintaining the lateral separation of these distinct molecular regions.

DOI: 10.1007/s101620020016
PMCID: PMC3202408
PMID: 12382104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Bacteriol. 1962 Jul;84(1):65-7. doi: 10.1128/JB.84.1.65-67.1962.

Occurrence of Clostridium difficile in infections of man.

SMITH LD, KING EO.

Smith, Louis DS. (Montana State College, Bozeman) and Elizabeth O. King. 
Occurrence of Clostridium difficile in infections of man. J. Bacteriol. 
84:65-67. 1962-Eight strains of Clostridium difficile were isolated from cases 
of infection in man in seven different bacteriological laboratories. One of 
these was isolated from a case of gas gangrene, one from an abscess following a 
fractured femur, one from a blood culture from an infant, two from pleural 
fluid, two from peritoneal fluid, and one from an abscess in the vaginal vault. 
There was no evidence, in these cases, that C. difficile is pathogenic for man. 
All strains were typical morphologically and culturally and were lethal when 
inoculated intramuscularly into guinea pigs.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.84.1.65-67.1962
PMCID: PMC277766
PMID: 13914327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Sci Transl Med. 2016 Dec 21;8(370):370tc2. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad8926.

Comment on "A small-molecule antivirulence agent for treating Clostridium 
difficile infection".

Beilhartz GL(1), Tam J(1), Zhang Z(1)(2), Melnyk RA(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Structure & Function, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, 
Canada.
(3)Molecular Structure & Function, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario M5G 0A4, Canada. roman.melnyk@sickkids.ca.

Comment in
    Sci Transl Med. 2016 Dec 21;8(370):370tr2.

Comment on
    Sci Transl Med. 2015 Sep 23;7(306):306ra148.

New insights into the mechanism of action of ebselen, a small-molecule 
antivirulence agent that reduces disease pathology in a mouse model of 
Clostridium difficile infection, suggest a different molecular target may be 
responsible for its efficacy.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aad8926
PMID: 28003550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1997 Oct 1;155(1):45-54. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6968.1997.tb12684.x.

The C-terminal ligand-binding domain of Clostridium difficile toxin A (TcdA) 
abrogates TcdA-specific binding to cells and prevents mouse lethality.

Sauerborn M(1), Leukel P, von Eichel-Streiber C.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Mainz, Germany. 
mks@dl.ac.uk

We have investigated the ability of a recombinant protein (REP231), derived from 
Clostridium difficile toxin A C-terminal domain, to protect against toxin A 
(TcdA) intoxication in vitro and in vivo. REP231 was cloned, expressed and 
purified by thyroglobulin affinity chromatography, and demonstrated identical 
binding properties to TcdA. Immunofluorescence experiments and in vitro 
cytotoxicity assays using mouse teratocarcinoma cells F9 showed that specific 
binding of TcdA to F9 cells through its C-terminal domain is essential for 
producing cytotoxic effects. TcdA binding and cytotoxicity was inhibited by 
REP231 and a monoclonal antibody directed against the C-terminal domain. Toxin B 
did not bind to F9 cells and was consequently inactive in cytotoxicity assays. 
Inhibition studies with lectins and a Le(x)-specific antibody supported earlier 
findings that a terminal galactose is part of the bound saccharide but excluded 
Le(x) as a receptor for TcdA. Mice immunised with REP231 were protected against 
a threefold lethal dose of TcdA. Thus, REP231 appeared to be a suitable 
candidate to develop an alternative therapeutic agent, which is able to 
neutralise carbohydrate-mediated TcdA binding and might act as a vaccine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.1997.tb12684.x
PMID: 9345763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 May;55(5):2174-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01612-10. 
Epub 2011 Feb 22.

Effect of ceftobiprole treatment on growth of and toxin production by 
Clostridium difficile in cecal contents of mice.

Nerandzic MM(1), Donskey CJ.

Author information:
(1)Research Service, Cleveland VA Medical Center, 10701 East Blvd., Cleveland, 
OH 44106, USA.

Ceftobiprole and ceftobiprole medocaril did not promote growth of or toxin 
production by Clostridium difficile in mouse cecal contents, whereas 
ceftazidime, cefoxitin, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, and ertapenem did. The 
relatively low propensity of ceftobiprole to promote C. difficile was 
attributable to inhibitory activity against C. difficile and sparing of 
anaerobic microflora.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01612-10
PMCID: PMC3088227
PMID: 21343463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Vet Med (Auckl). 2016 May 31;7:71-74. doi: 10.2147/VMRR.S105238. eCollection 
2016.

Commentary on key aspects of fecal microbiota transplantation in small animal 
practice.

Chaitman J(1), Jergens AE(2), Gaschen F(3), Garcia-Mazcorro JF(4), Marks SL(5), 
Marroquin-Cardona AG(4), Richter K(6), Rossi G(7), Suchodolski JS(8), Weese 
JS(9).

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Internal Medicine and Allergy Specialists, New York, NY.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames, IA.
(3)School of Veterinary Medicine, Lousiana State University, LA, USA.
(4)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, General 
Escobedo, Nuevo León, Mexico, jose.garciamzc@uanl.edu.mx.
(5)Department of Medicine & Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California, Davis, Davis.
(6)Veterinary Specialty Hospital of San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Veterinary Science, School of Veterinary Medical Sciences, 
University of Camerino, Camerino, Italy.
(8)Gastrointestinal Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.
(9)Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada.

The gastrointestinal tract of dogs, cats, and other mammals including humans 
harbors millions of beneficial microorganisms that regulate and maintain health. 
Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a procedure involving the 
administration of a fecal infusion from a healthy individual (donor) to a 
patient with disease to help improve health. Despite the effectiveness of FMT to 
treat intestinal disorders in humans, in particular recurrent Clostridium 
difficile infection, there is a paucity of scientific data regarding the 
application of FMT in veterinary patients. Here, we outline key aspects of FMT 
in small animal practice.

DOI: 10.2147/VMRR.S105238
PMCID: PMC6055767
PMID: 30050839

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure AEJ, FG, JFGM, SLM, KR, GR, JSS, and 
JSW are members of the Comparative Gastroenterology Society 
(http://vetmed.tamu.edu/cgs). AGMC is a member of the American Academy of 
Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics (https://aavpt.site-ym.com/). The 
authors report no other conflicts of interest in this work.


361. Lab Anim. 1986 Jul;20(3):266-70. doi: 10.1258/002367786780865629.

Isolation of Clostridium difficile from various colonies of laboratory mice.

Itoh K, Lee WK, Kawamura H, Mitsuoka T, Magaribuchi T.

An attempt was made to isolate Clostridium difficile from a total of 565 mice 
from nine different conventional mouse colonies and six different 
specified-pathogen-free mouse colonies. C. difficile was isolated from all the 
conventional colonies but from none of the specified-pathogen-free colonies. 
Ampicillin injected intraperitoneally increased the isolation rate of C. 
difficile from mouse faeces to 63.6% compared with 19.4% from untreated mice.

DOI: 10.1258/002367786780865629
PMID: 3795866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Infect Immun. 2011 Jun;79(6):2295-302. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00130-11. Epub 2011 Apr 
11.

Immunization with Bacillus spores expressing toxin A peptide repeats protects 
against infection with Clostridium difficile strains producing toxins A and B.

Permpoonpattana P(1), Hong HA, Phetcharaburanin J, Huang JM, Cook J, Fairweather 
NF, Cutting SM.

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Royal Holloway, University of London, Egham, 
Surrey, TW20 0EX United Kingdom.

Clostridium difficile is a leading cause of nosocomial infection in the 
developed world. Two toxins, A and B, produced by most strains of C. difficile 
are implicated as virulence factors, yet only recently has the requirement of 
these for infection been investigated by genetic manipulation. Current vaccine 
strategies are focused mostly on parenteral delivery of toxoids. In this work, 
we have used bacterial spores (Bacillus subtilis) as a delivery vehicle to 
evaluate the carboxy-terminal repeat domains of toxins A and B as protective 
antigens. Our findings are important and show that oral immunization of the 
repeat domain of toxin A is sufficient to confer protection in a hamster model 
of infection designed to closely mimic the human course of infection. 
Importantly, neutralizing antibodies to the toxin A repeat domain were shown to 
be cross-reactive with the analogous domain of toxin B and, being of high 
avidity, provided protection against challenge with a C. difficile strain 
producing toxins A and B (A(+)B(+)). Thus, although many strains produce both 
toxins, antibodies to only toxin A can mediate protection. Animals vaccinated 
with recombinant spores were fully able to survive reinfection, a property that 
is particularly important for a disease with which patients are prone to 
relapse. We show that mucosal immunization, not parenteral delivery, is required 
to generate secretory IgA and that production of these neutralizing polymeric 
antibodies correlates with protection. This work demonstrates that an effective 
vaccine against C. difficile can be designed around two attributes, mucosal 
delivery and the repeat domain of toxin A.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00130-11
PMCID: PMC3125831
PMID: 21482682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1983 Jan;45(1):347-9. doi: 
10.1128/AEM.45.1.347-349.1983.

Differentiation of Clostridium difficile toxin from Clostridium botulinum toxin 
by the mouse lethality test.

Gilligan PH, Brown L, Berman RE.

The mouse lethality test is the most sensitive method for confirming the 
diagnosis of infant botulism. Both Clostridium difficile and Clostridium 
botulinum produce heat-labile toxins which are lethal for mice and can be found 
in the feces of infants. These two toxins can be distinguished from one another 
in this assay when both are present in the same fecal specimen because they 
appear to be immunologically distinct toxins.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.45.1.347-349.1983
PMCID: PMC242285
PMID: 6824325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Schweiz Arch Tierheilkd. 1995;137(5):165-71.

[Presence of Campylobacter spp., Clostridium difficile, C. perfringens and 
salmonellae in litters of puppies and in adult dogs in a shelter].

[Article in French]

Buogo C(1), Burnens AP, Perrin J, Nicolet J.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Bactériologie Vétérinaire, l'Université de Berne.

In order to ascertain the importance of Campylobacter spp., C.difficile, 
C.perfringens and Salmonella as agents of bacterial gastroenteritis in dogs, two 
groups of animals were studied prospectively. The first group consisted of 77 
puppies in 14 litters, with fecal cultures performed weekly for 10 weeks, 
starting at birth. The second group consisted of a kennel population with every 
dog cultured at entry, and at two-month intervals thereafter. Incidence of 
Campylobacter spp. was 32 and 31 per 100 dog-month of observation for healthy 
pups and healthy adult dogs respectively, 46 and 0 for C.difficile, 51 and 36 
for C.perfringens and 6.5 and 1.3 for Salmonella. The incidence of Campylobacter 
spp. in pups peaked at 8 weeks of age. This incidence (43 per 100 dog-months) 
was higher in pups reared together with older dogs than in pups reared without 
contact to other dogs (0 per 100 dog-months). Toxigenic strains of C.difficile 
were found in 61.5% of the healthy neonate dogs. None of the cases of non-watery 
and non-inflammatory diarrhea we observed was associated with any of the 
pathogens studied. Furthermore newly acquired colonization with Campylobacter 
spp. or Salmonella was never associated with episodes of diarrhea. No 
conclusions could be drawn about the role of bacterial pathogens for causation 
of watery or inflammatory diarrhea which were not observed in our study.

PMID: 7569838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Vet Microbiol. 2011 Dec 29;154(1-2):130-4. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2011.06.032. 
Epub 2011 Jul 2.

The relation between farm specific factors and prevalence of Clostridium 
difficile in slaughter pigs.

Keessen EC(1), van den Berkt AJ, Haasjes NH, Hermanus C, Kuijper EJ, Lipman LJ.

Author information:
(1)Utrecht University, Division of Public Health and Food Safety, Institute for 
Risk Assessment Sciences, PO Box 80175, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Foodborne ingestion through pork products of Clostridium difficile has been 
suggested a possible route of transmission of C difficile from pigs to humans. 
To determine whether C. difficile bacteria are present in the intestines of 
slaughter pigs, rectum contents of 677 slaughter pigs from 52 farms were 
collected at the slaughterhouse. Data on farm specific factors were collected 
and the association of these factors with the presence of C. difficile in pig 
herds from 39 farms was assessed. The prevalence of C. difficile and the 
ribotypical diversity that were found in this study were much higher than 
previously reported in literature, with an overall C. difficile prevalence of 
8.6% (58/677). Sixteen distinct C. difficile ribotypes were identified, 
predominantly type 078 (31.0%, 18/58). This type is also commonly found in 
humans with C. difficile infection (CDI). Both on individual pig level and on 
herd level, no significant difference between the prevalence of C. difficile in 
pigs derived from conventional or organic farming types was detected. Farm 
system, size, and presence of other animal species on the farm did not result in 
significant different prevalences of C. difficile.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2011.06.032
PMID: 21783332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Sep;56(9):4786-92. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00508-12. 
Epub 2012 Jun 25.

MBX-500, a hybrid antibiotic with in vitro and in vivo efficacy against 
toxigenic Clostridium difficile.

Butler MM(1), Shinabarger DL, Citron DM, Kelly CP, Dvoskin S, Wright GE, Feng H, 
Tzipori S, Bowlin TL.

Author information:
(1)Microbiotix, Inc., Worcester, Massachusetts, USA. mbutler@microbiotix.com

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) causes moderate to severe disease, 
resulting in diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis. CDI is difficult to treat 
due to production of inflammation-inducing toxins, resistance development, and 
high probability of recurrence. Only two antibiotics are approved for the 
treatment of CDI, and the pipeline for therapeutic agents contains few new 
drugs. MBX-500 is a hybrid antibacterial, composed of an anilinouracil DNA 
polymerase inhibitor linked to a fluoroquinolone DNA gyrase/topoisomerase 
inhibitor, with potential as a new therapeutic for CDI treatment. Since MBX-500 
inhibits three bacterial targets, it has been previously shown to be minimally 
susceptible to resistance development. In the present study, the in vitro and in 
vivo efficacies of MBX-500 were explored against the Gram-positive anaerobe, C. 
difficile. MBX-500 displayed potency across nearly 50 isolates, including those 
of the fluoroquinolone-resistant, toxin-overproducing NAP1/027 ribotype, 
performing as well as comparator antibiotics vancomycin and metronidazole. 
Furthermore, MBX-500 was a narrow-spectrum agent, displaying poor activity 
against many other gut anaerobes. MBX-500 was active in acute and recurrent 
infections in a toxigenic hamster model of CDI, exhibiting full protection 
against acute infections and prevention of recurrence in 70% of the animals. 
Hamsters treated with MBX-500 displayed significantly greater weight gain than 
did those treated with vancomycin. Finally, MBX-500 was efficacious in a murine 
model of CDI, again demonstrating a fully protective effect and permitting 
near-normal weight gain in the treated animals. These selective anti-CDI 
features support the further development of MBX 500 for the treatment of CDI.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00508-12
PMCID: PMC3421853
PMID: 22733075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Aug;58(8):4703-12. doi: 10.1128/AAC.03112-14. 
Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Preclinical studies of amixicile, a systemic therapeutic developed for treatment 
of Clostridium difficile infections that also shows efficacy against 
Helicobacter pylori.

Hoffman PS(1), Bruce AM(2), Olekhnovich I(3), Warren CA(3), Burgess SL(3), 
Hontecillas R(4), Viladomiu M(4), Bassaganya-Riera J(4), Guerrant RL(3), 
Macdonald TL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and International 
Health, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA Department of 
Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA psh2n@virginia.edu.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and International 
Health, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(4)Center for Modeling Immunity to Enteric Pathogens, Virginia Bioinformatics 
Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.

Amixicile shows efficacy in the treatment of Clostridium difficile infections 
(CDI) in a mouse model, with no recurrence of CDI. Since amixicile selectively 
inhibits the action of a B vitamin (thiamine pyrophosphate) cofactor of 
pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR), it may both escape mutation-based 
drug resistance and spare beneficial probiotic gut bacteria that do not express 
this enzyme. Amixicile is a water-soluble derivative of nitazoxanide (NTZ), an 
antiparasitic therapeutic that also shows efficacy against CDI in humans. In 
comparative studies, amixicile showed no toxicity to hepatocytes at 200 μM (NTZ 
was toxic above 10 μM); was not metabolized by human, dog, or rat liver 
microsomes; showed equivalence or superiority to NTZ in cytochrome P450 assays; 
and did not activate efflux pumps (breast cancer resistance protein, P 
glycoprotein). A maximum dose (300 mg/kg) of amixicile given by the oral or 
intraperitoneal route was well tolerated by mice and rats. Plasma exposure 
(rats) based on the area under the plasma concentration-time curve was 79.3 h · 
μg/ml (30 mg/kg dose) to 328 h · μg/ml (100 mg/kg dose), the maximum 
concentration of the drug in serum was 20 μg/ml, the time to the maximum 
concentration of the drug in serum was 0.5 to 1 h, and the half-life was 5.6 h. 
Amixicile did not concentrate in mouse feces or adversely affect gut populations 
of Bacteroides species, Firmicutes, segmented filamentous bacteria, or 
Lactobacillus species. Systemic bioavailability was demonstrated through 
eradication of Helicobacter pylori in a mouse infection model. In summary, the 
efficacy of amixicile in treating CDI and other infections, together with low 
toxicity, an absence of mutation-based drug resistance, and excellent drug 
metabolism and pharmacokinetic metrics, suggests a potential for broad 
application in the treatment of infections caused by PFOR-expressing microbial 
pathogens in addition to CDI.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.03112-14
PMCID: PMC4136022
PMID: 24890599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Infect Immun. 1989 Jun;57(6):1680-3. doi: 10.1128/IAI.57.6.1680-1683.1989.

Fixation of Clostridium difficile toxin A and cholera toxin to intestinal brush 
border membranes from axenic and conventional mice.

Lucas F(1), Elmer GW, Brot-Laroche E, Corthier G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Microbienne, Institut National de la Recherche 
Agronomique, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

We have tested the in vitro binding of Clostridium difficile toxin A 
(enterotoxin) and cholera toxin to intestinal brush border membranes prepared 
from either conventional or axenic mice. Membranes from axenic mice were shown 
to be saturated at a lower toxin A concentration (at least 2.5 times lower). 
Because there were no significant differences between membranes from axenic and 
conventional mice in binding at low toxin A concentrations, the presence of the 
normal microflora seems to increase the number but not the affinity of brush 
border membrane receptors on the enterocyte surface. Corroborating the in vitro 
results, we observed that conventional mice were more sensitive to the 
pathological effects of toxin A given intragastrically than were axenic mice. In 
contrast, there was no difference in the binding characteristics of cholera 
toxin between membranes from conventional and axenic mice. We conclude that the 
presence of the mouse intestinal bacteria increases the number of C. difficile 
toxin A intestinal receptors but does not influence cholera toxin receptors.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.57.6.1680-1683.1989
PMCID: PMC313339
PMID: 2785961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Clin Microbiol. 1992 Feb;30(2):514-6. doi: 10.1128/JCM.30.2.514-516.1992.

Comparison of five cultural procedures for isolation of Clostridium difficile 
from stools.

Marler LM(1), Siders JA, Wolters LC, Pettigrew Y, Skitt BL, Allen SD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis 
46202-5113.

Several procedures have been described for the culture of Clostridium difficile 
from stool specimens. The goal of this study was to determine the effectiveness 
of five of these methods for the isolation of C. difficile from feces of 
patients suspected of having C. difficile-associated illness. A total of 564 
stool specimens were cultured by using heat shock, ethanol treatment (ET), and 
direct plating on Carr-Scarborough cycloserine-cefoxitin-fructose agar (CCFA) 
with horse blood (C/S medium), BBL CCFA medium, and Remel C. difficile agar. 
Cytotoxin assays were performed on all specimens. A total of 113 specimens (20%) 
were positive for C. difficile by one or more methods. The numbers of positive 
cultures by using heat shock, ET, and direct plating on C/S medium, BBL CCFA 
medium, and Remel C. difficile agar were 79 (70%), 89 (79%), 91 (81%), 79 (70%), 
and 52 (46%), respectively. We concluded that ET and direct plating on C/S 
medium were the most effective procedures for isolating C. difficile from stool 
specimens and found significant variation in the performance of modified CCFA 
from different manufacturers.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.30.2.514-516.1992
PMCID: PMC265091
PMID: 1537928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2005 May 15;246(2):199-205. doi: 
10.1016/j.femsle.2005.04.005.

Passive immunisation of hamsters against Clostridium difficile infection using 
antibodies to surface layer proteins.

O'Brien JB(1), McCabe MS, Athié-Morales V, McDonald GS, Ní Eidhin DB, Kelleher 
DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Trinity College Dublin and Dublin Molecular 
Medicine Centre, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. jobrie13@tcd.ie

Clostridium difficile is a major cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and 
the primary cause of pseudomembraneous colitis in hospitalised patients. We 
assessed the protective effect of anti-surface layer protein (SLP) antibodies on 
C. difficile infection in a lethal hamster challenge model. Post-challenge 
survival was significantly prolonged in the anti-SLP treated group compared with 
control groups (P=0.0281 and P=0.0283). The potential mechanism of action of the 
antiserum was shown to be through enhancement of C. difficile phagocytosis. This 
report indicates that anti-SLP antibodies can modulate the course of C. 
difficile infection and may therefore merit closer investigation for use as 
constituents of multi-component vaccines against C. difficile associated 
diarrhoea.

DOI: 10.1016/j.femsle.2005.04.005
PMID: 15899406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Drugs. 1985;29 Suppl 5:57-63. doi: 10.2165/00003495-198500295-00012.

Studies with temocillin in the hamster model of antibiotic-associated colitis.

Boon RJ, Beale AS.

The studies reported here were designed to ascertain whether or not the new 
beta-lactam antibiotic, temocillin, would produce antibiotic-associated colitis 
in the hamster. The experiments were controlled with clindamycin and cefoxitin, 
which are known to induce antibiotic-associated colitis experimentally and 
clinically. All three antibiotics were administered to groups of animals both 
parenterally and orally. Clindamycin, at 1 mg/hamster, caused a slow onset of 
antibiotic-associated colitis by both routes, with death occurring at between 4 
and 8 days. 80 to 100% of the animals had diarrhoea and showed signs of 
haemorrhage and caecal distension, with the caecal contents being Clostridium 
difficile toxin-positive. The onset of antibiotic-associated colitis after 
administration of cefoxitin was less marked at the 1 mg parenteral dose, with 
only 40% of the hamsters showing signs of colitis. At the higher doses of 
cefoxitin, colitis was more severe and the animals exhibited dramatic weight 
loss, with death occurring at between 3 and 5 days. The majority of animals had 
diarrhoea and were C. difficile toxin-positive; 60 to 80% also showed signs of 
haemorrhage and caecal distension. In contrast, the hamsters receiving 
temocillin remained healthy with no signs of diarrhoea, and showed consistent 
weight gain. No pathological abnormalities were observed and the caecal contents 
were toxin-negative. These results suggest that temocillin therapy in humans is 
unlikely to cause significant disturbance of the gastrointestinal flora.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-198500295-00012
PMID: 4029030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Med Microbiol. 1988 Mar;25(3):191-6. doi: 10.1099/00222615-25-3-191.

Mucosal association by Clostridium difficile in the hamster gastrointestinal 
tract.

Borriello SP(1), Welch AR, Barclay FE, Davies HA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Communicable Diseases, Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, 
Middlesex.

For many organisms, mucosal association is an important virulence determinant. 
Although studied in detail for other intestinal pathogens, this aspect of 
pathogenicity has not been studied for Clostridium difficile. We compared the 
ability of an avirulent non-toxigenic strain (M-1), a highly virulent toxigenic 
strain (B-1), and a poorly virulent toxigenic strain (BAT) of C. difficile to 
adhere to different regions of the gastrointestinal tract of hamsters 
pre-treated with clindamycin. Strain B-1 associated with the gut mucosa 
significantly better than strain M-1 (p less than 0.001) for all sites other 
than the caecum, and achieved significantly higher levels in the caecal contents 
(p less than 0.001). The same was true when strain B-1 was compared with strain 
BAT except that there was no significant difference for the large bowel mucosa. 
To assess the possible role of toxin in promoting mucosal association, e.g., by 
compromising host defences or exposing masked adherence sites, strain M-1 was 
given to animals after intra-caecal administration of crude toxin preparations 
from strain-B1, which were heat-inactivated in control experiments. The addition 
of this toxin increased significantly the mucosal association of M-1 for the 
small bowel only, whereas the inactivated toxin had no significant effect. These 
results imply that there may be intrinsic differences between strains in their 
ability to colonise and associate with the gut mucosa, which may partly depend 
on their ability to produce toxin. These differences do not correlate with 
cell-surface hydrophobicity or the presence of plasmids, flagella or fimbriae.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-25-3-191
PMID: 3346902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Environ Microbiol. 2017 May;19(5):1933-1958. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.13696. Epub 
2017 Mar 21.

The alternative sigma factor σ(B) plays a crucial role in adaptive strategies of 
Clostridium difficile during gut infection.

Kint N(1)(2), Janoir C(3), Monot M(1)(2), Hoys S(3), Soutourina O(1)(2), Dupuy 
B(1)(2), Martin-Verstraete I(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Pathogénese des Bactéries Anaérobies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, 
France.
(2)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France.
(3)EA 4043, Unité Bactéries Pathogènes et Santé (UBaPS), Université Paris-Sud, 
Université Paris-Saclay, 92290, Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Comment in
    Environ Microbiol. 2017 Jul;19(7):2523-2528.

Clostridium difficile is a major cause of diarrhoea associated with 
antibiotherapy. Exposed to stresses in the gut, C. difficile can survive by 
inducing protection, detoxification and repair systems. In several firmicutes, 
most of these systems are controlled by the general stress response involving σB 
. In this work, we studied the role of σB in the physiopathology of C. 
difficile. We showed that the survival of the sigB mutant during the stationary 
phase was reduced. Using a transcriptome analysis, we showed that σB controls 
the expression of ∼25% of genes including genes involved in sporulation, 
metabolism, cell surface biogenesis and the management of stresses. By contrast, 
σB does not control toxin gene expression. In agreement with the up-regulation 
of sporulation genes, the sporulation efficiency is higher in the sigB mutant 
than in the wild-type strain. sigB inactivation also led to increased 
sensitivity to acidification, cationic antimicrobial peptides, nitric oxide and 
ROS. In addition, we showed for the first time that σB also plays a crucial role 
in oxygen tolerance in this strict anaerobe. Finally, we demonstrated that the 
fitness of colonisation by the sigB mutant is greatly affected in a dixenic 
mouse model of colonisation when compared to the wild-type strain.

© 2017 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.13696
PMID: 28198085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Microbiol Biotechnol. 2016 Mar;26(3):567-71. doi: 10.4014/jmb.1512.12017.

A Detrimental Role of Immunosuppressive Drug, Dexamethasone, During Clostridium 
difficile Infection in Association with a Gastrointestinal Microbial Shift.

Kim HB(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(3), Sun X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Disease and Global Health, Tufts University, North 
Grafton, MA 01536, USA.
(2)Department of Animal Resource and Science, Dankook University, Cheonan, 
Chungnam 31116, Republic of Korea.
(3)School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 
Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Key Laboratory of Urban Agriculture, 
Ministry of Agriculture, Shanghai 200240, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, FL 33612, USA.

We investigated the increased risk of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) 
caused by the combined use of antibiotics and an immunosuppressive drug in a 
mouse model. Our data showed that an approximate return to pretreatment 
conditions of gut microbiota occurred within days after cessation of the 
antibiotic treatment, whereas the recovery of gut microbiota was delayed with 
the combined treatment of antibiotics and dexamethasone, leading to an increased 
severity of CDI. An alteration of gut microbiota is a key player in CDI. 
Therefore, our data implied that immunosuppressive drugs can increase the risk 
of CDI through the delayed recovery of altered gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.4014/jmb.1512.12017
PMCID: PMC4832933
PMID: 26809802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Can J Microbiol. 1982 Jan;28(1):100-5. doi: 10.1139/m82-009.

Morphologic and functional effects of Clostridium difficile enterotoxin in 
tissue culture.

Gurwith MJ, Langston C, Dunsmore B.

The effects of the Clostridium difficile toxin were examined in HeLa and mouse 
adrenal tumor (MAT) cells. Cytotoxicity was evaluated by vital dye exclusion and 
51Cr release. In both HeLa and MAT cells, C. difficile toxin caused rounding of 
virtually 100% of cells. This rounding was distinguishable from rounding 
produced by the Escherichia coli heat-labile enterotoxin (LT): (1) LT was 
inactive in HeLa cells; (2) in MAT cells, C. difficile toxin produced uniformly 
rounded cells, while LT-rounded cells usually had cytoplasmic extensions and a 
regular background of flattened cells. In C. difficile toxin affected HeLa 
cells, there were less than mitotic figures per 1000 cells compared with 15-18 
in controls. Clostridium difficile toxin treated HeLa cells showed less than 10% 
cytotoxicity in 24 h and no more than 30% by 74 h, similar to control cells. 
However, paralleling the suppression of mitotic figures, cell multiplication was 
inhibited in C. difficile toxin treated cells when subcultured in a short-term 
(72 h) assay compared with up to a 500% increase in control cells. This 
inhibition was also seen in a 6-week cloning assay in which C. difficile toxin 
treated cells had a cloning efficiency of less than 1% compared with 
approximately 10% in controls. We conclude that the major effect of the C. 
difficile toxin is inhibition of growth rather than immediate cell death. The 
relationship of this growth inhibition to colitis remains to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1139/m82-009
PMID: 7066760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Microb Pathog. 1986 Aug;1(4):373-85. doi: 10.1016/0882-4010(86)90069-0.

Lysosomal involvement in cellular intoxication with Clostridium difficile toxin 
B.

Florin I(1), Thelestam M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Karolinska institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

The process of internalisation of Clostridium difficile toxin B into human lung 
fibroblasts was further studied, with the aim of elucidating the fate of 
endocytosed toxin. Development of the toxin-induced cytopathogenic effect was 
reversibly inhibited at 18 degrees C and in the presence of 200 mM KCl or 1-20 
mM benzyl alcohol, i.e. at conditions when the fusion between endosomes and 
lysosomes is prevented. Fibroblasts treated with toxin at 37 degrees C but 
transferred to 18 degrees C within 10 min were also completely protected, 
whereas transfer to 18 degrees C later during the latency resulted in only 
partial protection. KCl was also protective upon addition after the toxin 
binding step. Inhibitors of lysosomal proteases, such as chymostatin, leupeptin 
and antipain, prevented the appearance of the cytopathogenic effect, when 
present during toxin exposure or added after the toxin binding step. Chinese 
hamster ovary cell mutants, defective in acidification of their endosomes, were 
resistant to toxin B, whereas wildtype cells were sensitive. The resistance was 
not overcome by applying a low extracellular pH. The results suggest that 
exposure to a low pH compartment is necessary but not sufficient for entry of 
active toxin B to the cytosol. In addition to a low pH, a fusion of 
toxin-containing endosomes with lysosomes and a further processing of the toxin 
by lysosomal proteases is required for cellular intoxication.

DOI: 10.1016/0882-4010(86)90069-0
PMID: 3508493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Hosp Infect. 1999 Feb;41(2):101-5. doi: 10.1016/s0195-6701(99)90046-4.

Evaluation of microbicidal activity of a new disinfectant: Sterilox 2500 against 
Clostridium difficile spores, Helicobacter pylori, vancomycin resistant 
Enterococcus species, Candida albicans and several Mycobacterium species.

Shetty N(1), Srinivasan S, Holton J, Ridgway GL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University College London Hospitals.

The microbicidal activity of a new disinfectant Sterilox, a super-oxidized 
water, containing a mixture of oxidizing substances, was tested against 
Clostridium difficile spores, Helicobacter pylori, vancomycin resistant 
Enterococcus species, Candida albicans and several Mycobacterium species using 
membrane filters. All tests were performed in duplicate with and without added 
horse serum at 1% and 5% v/v. Distilled water, 0.35% peracetic acid (Nu-Cidex) 
and 2% glutaraldehyde were included as controls. Sterilox: spore suspension (9:1 
v/v) achieved log10 kill of > 5 with 5% horse serum in 2 min against H. pylori, 
vancomycin resistant Enterococcus species, C. albicans and four atypical 
Mycobacterium species: M. avium, M. chelonei, M. xenopi and M. smegmatis. 
Sporicidal activity of Sterilox against Clostridium difficile was markedly 
diminished in the presence of 5% horse serum. Sterilox may be an effective 
alternative in endoscopy units, as it is a potent microbicidal agent and the 
manufacturer claims it is not corrosive to metal and is nontoxic to biological 
tissues.

DOI: 10.1016/s0195-6701(99)90046-4
PMID: 10063471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Infect Immun. 1987 Oct;55(10):2526-30. doi: 10.1128/IAI.55.10.2526-2530.1987.

Production of a unique cytotoxin by Campylobacter jejuni.

Guerrant RL(1), Wanke CA, Pennie RA, Barrett LJ, Lima AA, O'Brien AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville 22908.

Campylobacter jejuni is an important diarrheal pathogen worldwide; the 
mechanisms by which it causes disease remain unclear. Because of its association 
with inflammatory diarrhea, we postulated that C. jejuni might produce a 
cytotoxin similar to that produced by Shigella sp., enterohemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli O157, or Clostridium difficile. Filtrates of 12 
polymyxin-treated isolates of C. jejuni were placed on HeLa cells (sensitive to 
Shiga toxin cytotoxicity) and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Of 12 isolates 
of C. jejuni tested, 5 killed 50% of the cells at greater than or equal to 1:4 
dilutions of filtered suspensions of 10(9) bacteria per ml; killing was similar 
in HeLa and CHO cells (the CHO cells being insensitive to Shiga cytotoxin). One 
isolate produced a titer of 1:32 to 1:128. The relative potency in HeLa cells 
was comparable to that of E. coli strains that produce intermediate amounts of 
Shiga-like toxin. The other seven strains showed no cytotoxic effect, nor did 
the control diluents, polymyxin B, or supernatants of C. jejuni not treated with 
polymyxin B. Sonication also released active cytotoxin, but slightly less well 
than did polymyxin. The cytotoxic effect was dose dependent. Concentration of 
the C. jejuni in suspension by 10-fold before treatment with polymyxin B 
resulted in a 10-fold increase in the 50% cytotoxic dose. The cytotoxin effect 
was not neutralized by Shiga toxin immune serum against either Shiga-like toxin 
I or II or by anti-Clostridium difficile antiserum. The C jejuni cytotoxin was 
partially labile to trypsin (0.25%) and to heating to greater than or equal to 
60 degrees C. Cytotoxicity was retained in Scientific Products dialysis tubing 
D1615-1 (Mr cutoff, 12,000 to 14,000). Some isolates of C. jejuni release a 
substance lethal to HeLa or CHO cells in vitro that is distinct from Shiga-like 
or Clostridium difficile toxin. This cytotoxin may contribute to the colonic 
mucosal invasive process that characterizes C. jejuni enteritis.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.55.10.2526-2530.1987
PMCID: PMC260740
PMID: 3653987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 26;12(1):e0170640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170640. 
eCollection 2017.

Development of a Novel Vaccine Containing Binary Toxin for the Prevention of 
Clostridium difficile Disease with Enhanced Efficacy against NAP1 Strains.

Secore S(1), Wang S(1), Doughtry J(1), Xie J(1), Miezeiewski M(2), Rustandi 
RR(3), Horton M(1), Xoconostle R(1), Wang B(4), Lancaster C(3), Kristopeit A(5), 
Wang SC(5), Christanti S(5), Vitelli S(3), Gentile MP(5), Goerke A(5), Skinner 
J(1), Strable E(4), Thiriot DS(4), Bodmer JL(1), Heinrichs JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine Basic Research, Merck Research Laboratories, Merck and Company, 
Incorporated, West Point, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Eurofins Laboratories, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)Vaccine Analytical Development, Merck Research Laboratories, Merck and 
Company, Incorporated, West Point, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(4)Vaccine Drug Product Development, Merck Research Laboratories, Merck and 
Company, Incorporated, West Point, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(5)Vaccine Process Development, Merck Research Laboratories, Merck and Company, 
Incorporated, West Point, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) are a leading cause of nosocomial 
diarrhea in the developed world. The main virulence factors of the bacterium are 
the large clostridial toxins (LCTs), TcdA and TcdB, which are largely 
responsible for the symptoms of the disease. Recent outbreaks of CDI have been 
associated with the emergence of hypervirulent strains, such as NAP1/BI/027, 
many strains of which also produce a third toxin, binary toxin (CDTa and CDTb). 
These hypervirulent strains have been associated with increased morbidity and 
higher mortality. Here we present pre-clinical data describing a novel 
tetravalent vaccine composed of attenuated forms of TcdA, TcdB and binary toxin 
components CDTa and CDTb. We demonstrate, using the Syrian golden hamster model 
of CDI, that the inclusion of binary toxin components CDTa and CDTb 
significantly improves the efficacy of the vaccine against challenge with NAP1 
strains in comparison to vaccines containing only TcdA and TcdB antigens, while 
providing comparable efficacy against challenge with the prototypic, 
non-epidemic strain VPI10463. This combination vaccine elicits high neutralizing 
antibody titers against TcdA, TcdB and binary toxin in both hamsters and rhesus 
macaques. Finally we present data that binary toxin alone can act as a virulence 
factor in animal models. Taken together, these data strongly support the 
inclusion of binary toxin in a vaccine against CDI to provide enhanced 
protection from epidemic strains of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0170640
PMCID: PMC5268477
PMID: 28125650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SS, SW, JD, JX, RRR, MH, RX, BW, CL, AK, SCW, 
SC, SV, MPG, AG, JS, ES, DST, JLB, and JHH are current or past employees of 
Merck as stated in the affiliations and potentially own stock and/or hold stock 
options in the company. Other authors have no competing interests. This does not 
alter our adherence to all PLOS policies on sharing data and materials.


380. Equine Vet J. 1997 Jul;29(4):314-8. doi: 10.1111/j.2042-3306.1997.tb03129.x.

The association of erythromycin ethylsuccinate with acute colitis in horses in 
Sweden.

Gustafsson A(1), Båverud V, Gunnarsson A, Rantzien MH, Lindholm A, Franklin A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Swedish 
University of Agricultural sciences, Box 7018, S-750 07 Uppsala, Sweden.

In Sweden there are several reports of mares developing acute colitis while 
their foals were being treated orally for Rhodococcus equi pneumonia with the 
combination of erythromycin and rifampicin. In this study 6 adult horses were 
given low oral dosages of these antibiotics, singly or in combination. Within 3 
days post administration of erythromycin, in one case in combination with 
rifampicin, 2 horses developed severe colitis (one fatal). Clostridium difficile 
was isolated from one of the horses, whereas no specific pathogens were isolated 
from the other. Both horses had typical changes in blood parameters seen in 
acute colitis. Clostridium difficile was also isolated from the faeces of a 
third horse given an even lower dosage of erythromycin in combination with 
rifampicin. This horse developed very mild clinical symptoms and recovered 
spontaneously. In the fourth horse given erythromycin only, very high numbers of 
Clostridium perfringens were isolated. The horses given rifampicin only did not 
develop any clinical symptoms and there were no major changes in their faecal 
flora. In conclusion, it has been demonstrated that low dosages of erythromycin 
ethylsuccinate can induce severe colitis in horses associated with major changes 
of the intestinal microflora. Clostridium difficile has been demonstrated as a 
potential aetiological agent in antibiotic-induced acute colitis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2042-3306.1997.tb03129.x
PMID: 15338913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Apr;280(4):G539-45. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.2001.280.4.G539.

Endogenous corticosteroids modulate Clostridium difficile toxin A-induced 
enteritis in rats.

Castagliuolo I(1), Karalis K, Valenick L, Pasha A, Nikulasson S, Wlk M, 
Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Massachusetts, Boston 02215, USA.

We examined the role of glucocorticoids in acute inflammatory diarrhea mediated 
by Clostridium difficile toxin A. Toxin A (5 microg) or buffer was injected in 
rat ileal loops, and intestinal responses were measured after 30 min to 4 h. 
Ileal toxin A administration increased plasma glucocorticoids after 1 h, at 
which time the toxin-stimulated secretion was not significant. Administration of 
the glucocorticoid analog dexamethasone inhibited toxin A-induced intestinal 
secretion and inflammation and downregulated toxin A-mediated increase of 
macrophage inflammatory protein-2. Adrenalectomy followed by replacement with 
glucocorticoids at various doses suggested that intestinal responses to toxin A 
were related to circulating levels of glucocorticoids. Administration of the 
glucocorticoid receptor antagonist RU-486 enhanced toxin A-mediated intestinal 
secretion and inflammation. We conclude that C. difficile toxin A causes 
increased secretion of endogenous glucocorticoids, which diminish the intestinal 
secretory and inflammatory effects of toxin A.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.2001.280.4.G539
PMID: 11254479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Infect Immun. 1989 Dec;57(12):3914-21. doi: 10.1128/IAI.57.12.3914-3921.1989.

Effect of Clostridium difficile enterotoxin A on ultrastructure of Chinese 
hamster ovary cells.

Kushnaryov VM(1), Sedmak JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226.

Electron microscopical immunocytochemistry and light microscopy were used to 
study the effect of Clostridium difficile enterotoxin A (EA) on cultured Chinese 
hamster ovary (CHO) cells. At 4 degrees C, immunocytochemically detected EA was 
randomly distributed along the plasma membrane; when cells were subsequently 
transferred to 37 degrees C, the EA moved into coated pits and coated vesicles 
within 2 min. Within 2 h of incubation at 37 degrees C with EA, the perinuclear 
cytoplasm of the CHO cells became highly refractile, and in 4 h, most of the 
cells were round; however, the majority of rounded cells excluded erythrosin B 
while remaining firmly attached to the culture dish plastic. When EA was removed 
from the cultured cells within 2 h, the cells returned to a normal morphology 
and formed a confluent monolayer. The nuclei of rounded cells were irregularly 
shaped; cytoplasmic intermediate filaments were collapsed toward the nucleus. 
Long bundles of parallel, 11-nm-diameter filaments appeared in the nuclei after 
3 h of incubation with EA and disappeared by the fourth hour of incubation. 
Intoxicated cells did not undergo mitosis. Thus, EA was internalized, at least 
in part, by receptor-mediated endocytosis and subsequently affected the nuclei 
of CHO cells.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.57.12.3914-3921.1989
PMCID: PMC259926
PMID: 2807554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Anaerobe. 2016 Jun;39:51-3. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.02.011. Epub 2016 Mar 
2.

Improving the reproducibility of the NAP1/B1/027 epidemic strain R20291 in the 
hamster model of infection.

Kelly ML(1), Ng YK(1), Cartman ST(2), Collery MM(1), Cockayne A(1), Minton 
NP(3).

Author information:
(1)Clostridia Research Group, BBSRC/EPSRC Synthetic Biology Research Centre 
(SBRC), School of Life Sciences, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom.
(2)Nottingham Digestive Disease Centre, NIHR Biomedical Research Unit, The 
University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(3)Clostridia Research Group, BBSRC/EPSRC Synthetic Biology Research Centre 
(SBRC), School of Life Sciences, Centre for Biomolecular Sciences, University of 
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, United Kingdom; Nottingham 
Digestive Disease Centre, NIHR Biomedical Research Unit, The University of 
Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
nigel.minton@nottingham.ac.uk.

Comparative analysis of the Clostridium difficile BI/NAP1/027 strain R20291 and 
ClosTron-derived ermB mutants in the hamster infection model are compromised by 
the clindamycin susceptibility of the parent. Mutants can appear more virulent. 
We have rectified this anomaly by genome engineering. The variant created 
(CRG20291) represents an ideal control strain for virulence assays of ClosTron 
mutants.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.02.011
PMCID: PMC4879870
PMID: 26946361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Drug Deliv. 2016 Jul;23(6):1940-7. doi: 10.3109/10717544.2015.1022836. Epub 2015 
Mar 23.

Development of microbeads of chicken yolk antibodies against Clostridium 
difficile toxin A for colonic-specific delivery.

Zhang S(1), Xing P(2), Guo G(2), Liu H(3), Lin D(2), Dong C(3), Li M(3), Feng 
D(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)a School of Pharmceutical Sciences, Shandong Binzhou Medical College , 
Shandong Province , China .
(2)b School of Pharmceutical Sciences, Yantai University , Shandong Province , 
China , and.
(3)c Center of Biotechnology, Shandong Bioasis Biotechnology Park , Shandong 
Province , China.

The incidence of Clostridium difficile infection has increased in Western world 
in the past 10 years, similar infection rates are also reported in developing 
countries such as China. Current antibiotics treatments have recurrence rates 
between 15% and 30%. IgY antibodies against toxin A of C. difficile could 
protect animal models from the challenge of lethal dose of C. difficile spores. 
However, IgY is sensitive to the low pH environment of the stomach and 
proteinases in the intestine. The objective of this study was to prepare 
colonic-specific delivery system of toxin A antigen-specific IgY to block the 
recognition of toxin A to the colon mucosa cells. Egg-laying hens were immunized 
with purified C. difficile toxin A C-terminal domain for 3 times, then egg IgY 
against the recombinant ToxA-C protein was purified from immunized egg yolk and 
frozen dried. IgY-loaded microbeads were prepared using mini fluid bed system; 
the loading efficiency was 21%. The pH and temperature stabilities of the 
microbeads were assayed. The IgY-loaded microbeads coated with 35% Eudragit S100 
had colonic-specific IgY release specificity both in vitro and in vivo, the 
colonic-specific release of biological active IgY was 87.5% in the rat. Our 
study provides a new option for the biological treatment C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.3109/10717544.2015.1022836
PMID: 25799315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Physiol. 1998 Jan 1;506 ( Pt 1)(Pt 1):83-93. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-7793.1998.083bx.x.

Clostridium difficile toxin B inhibits carbachol-induced force and myosin light 
chain phosphorylation in guinea-pig smooth muscle: role of Rho proteins.

Lucius C(1), Arner A, Steusloff A, Troschka M, Hofmann F, Aktories K, Pfitzer G.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologie, Charité, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Germany.

1. Clostridium difficile toxin B glucosylates the Ras-related low molecular mass 
GTPases of the Rho subfamily thereby inactivating them. In the present report, 
toxin B was applied as a tool to test whether Rho proteins participate in the 
carbachol-induced increase in the Ca2+ sensitivity of force and myosin light 
chain (MLC) phosphorylation in intact intestinal smooth muscle. 2. Small strips 
of the longitudinal muscle of guinea-pig small intestine were incubated in toxin 
B (40 ng ml-1) overnight. Carbachol-induced force and intracellular [Ca2+], and, 
in a separate series, force and MLC phosphorylation, were determined. 3. 
Carbachol induced a biphasic contraction: an initial rapid increase in force 
(peak 1) followed by a partial relaxation and a second delayed increase in force 
(peak 2). The peak of the Ca2+ signal measured with fura-2 preceded peak 1 of 
force and then declined to a lower suprabasal steady-state level. Peak 2 was not 
associated with a significant increase in [Ca2+]. Toxin B nearly completely 
inhibited peak 2 while peak 1 was not significantly inhibited. Toxin B had no 
effect on the Ca2+ transient. 4. In control strips, MLC phosphorylation at peak 
2 was 27.7% which was significantly higher than the resting value (18.6%). The 
inhibition of the second, delayed, rise in force induced by toxin B was 
associated with complete inhibition of the increase in MLC phosphorylation. The 
resting MLC phosphorylation was not significantly different from that of the 
control strips. 5. The initial increase in MLC phosphorylation determined 3 s 
after exposure to carbachol was 54% in the control strips. Toxin B also 
inhibited this initial phosphorylation peak despite the fact that the Ca2+ 
transient and the initial increase in force were not inhibited by toxin B. This 
suggests that Rho proteins play an important role in setting the balance between 
MLC phosphorylation and dephosphorylation reactions even at high levels of 
intracellular Ca2+. 6. These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that 
the delayed rise in force elicited by carbachol is due to an increase in the 
Ca2+ sensitivity of MLC phosphorylation mediated by Rho proteins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1998.083bx.x
PMCID: PMC2230702
PMID: 9481674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Environ Microbiol. 2009 Feb;11(2):505-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01790.x.

Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 toxinotype V found in diarrhoeal pigs 
identical to isolates from affected humans.

Debast SB(1), van Leengoed LA, Goorhuis A, Harmanus C, Kuijper EJ, Bergwerff AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Meander Medical Centre, Amersfoort, The 
Netherlands.

In diseased piglets from two Dutch pig-breeding farms with neonatal diarrhoea 
for more than a year, culture and PCR analyses identified the involved 
microorganism as Clostridium difficile PCR ribotype 078 harbouring toxin A 
(tcdA) and B (tcdB), and binary toxin genes. Isolated strains showed a 39 bp 
deletion in the tcdC gene and they were ermB gene-negative. A number of 11 
porcine and 21 human isolated C. difficile PCR ribotype 078 toxinotype V strains 
were found genetically related by multiple-locus variable-number tandem-repeat 
analysis (MLVA). Moreover, a clonal complex was identified, containing both 
porcine and human isolates. The porcine isolates showed an antimicrobial 
susceptibility profile overlapping that of isolates from Dutch human patients. 
On the basis of these pheno- and genotypical analyses results, it was concluded 
that the strains from affected piglets were indistinguishable from increasingly 
encountered C. difficile PCR ribotype 078 strains of human C. difficile 
infections in the Dutch population and that a common origin of animal and humans 
strains should be considered.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01790.x
PMID: 19196280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Infect Dis. 2001 Jun 15;183(12):1760-6. doi: 10.1086/320736. Epub 2001 May 11.

Infection of hamsters with epidemiologically important strains of Clostridium 
difficile.

Sambol SP(1), Tang JK, Merrigan MM, Johnson S, Gerding DN.

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease Section, Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Chicago 
Health Care System, Lakeside Division, and Northwestern University Medical 
School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Five different toxigenic strains of Clostridium difficile of known human 
epidemiologic importance were tested for virulence in hamsters. Three 
strains-types B1, J9, and K14-have caused hospital outbreaks. Type Y2 is 
associated with a high rate of asymptomatic colonization in patients. The fifth 
strain, type CF2, is a toxin A-negative, toxin B-positive strain implicated in 
multiple human cases of C. difficile-associated diarrhea. Groups of 10 hamsters 
per strain were given 1 dose of clindamycin, followed 5 days later with gastric 
inoculation of 100 cfu of C. difficile. Hamsters given types B1, J9, K14, or Y2 
showed 90%-100% colonization (albeit at a slower rate with type Y2) and 100% 
mortality of colonized animals. Hamsters challenged with type CF2 showed 60% (P= 
.01) colonization and 30% mortality (P= .0003). The hamster model demonstrated 
pathogenicity differences between a toxin variant strain and standard toxigenic 
strains but no significant differences among the standard strains.

DOI: 10.1086/320736
PMID: 11372028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Can J Vet Res. 1992 Jul;56(3):233-6.

Use of bacitracin in the prevention and treatment of experimentally-induced 
idiopathic colitis in horses.

Staempfli HR(1), Prescott JF, Carman RJ, McCutcheon LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph.

Ten healthy ponies from a single herd were found by repeated fecal culture to be 
free of Salmonella species and Clostridium cadaveris. In a preliminary study, 
four ponies administered a single oral dose of 10 mg/kg lincomycin did not 
develop idiopathic colitis when the drug was administered alone. Four other 
ponies were administered 10 mg/kg lincomycin by stomach tube together with 0.45 
L of colonic content from a horse with idiopathic colitis induced earlier by 
lincomycin alone. Two of the four ponies were treated with 25 g oral zinc 
bacitracin premix (110 g/kg active ingredient) 24 h later. Forty-two hours after 
inoculation the two untreated ponies had severe signs of idiopathic colitis and 
were euthanized. Postmortem findings were typical of idiopathic colitis. The two 
treated ponies had milder illness but the more severely affected was also 
euthanized; the other was retreated at 42 h with bacitracin pre-mix and again 12 
h later. Its illness and diarrhea resolved over the next 24 h. Clostridium 
cadaveris was isolated in large numbers from the cecum of the euthanized ponies 
and their cecal content contained mouse lethal and guinea pig dermonecrotic, but 
not cytotoxic, activity. Enterotoxins of Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium 
difficile could not be demonstrated. No toxin could be demonstrated in culture 
supernatants of C. cadaveris or in supernatants of cecal contents treated with 
ethanol prior to culturing in anaerobically incubated broth. No Salmonella spp. 
were isolated. A further two ponies were administered 10 mg/kg lincomycin orally 
with 0.45 L colonic content from a horse with idiopathic colitis, as 
described.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC1263544
PMID: 1423060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Gastroenterology. 1993 Apr;104(4):1108-15. doi: 10.1016/0016-5085(93)90280-p.

Saccharomyces boulardii inhibits Clostridium difficile toxin A binding and 
enterotoxicity in rat ileum.

Pothoulakis C(1), Kelly CP, Joshi MA, Gao N, O'Keane CJ, Castagliuolo I, Lamont 
JT.

Author information:
(1)Evans Memorial Department of Clinical Research, University Hospital, Boston 
University School of Medicine, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Saccharomyces boulardii is a nonpathogenic yeast used for the 
prevention and treatment of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea and 
colitis. However, the mechanism by which S. boulardii exerts its protective 
effects remains unclear.
METHODS: The binding of [3H]toxin A to its brush border receptor preincubated 
with S. boulardii-cultured suspension or filtered conditioned medium was 
measured in vitro. The effect of toxin A on secretion, epithelial permeability, 
and morphology in rat ileal loops in vivo was also examined in rats pretreated 
with S. boulardii.
RESULTS: S. boulardii reduced [3H]toxin A-receptor binding in a dose-dependent 
fashion. Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of ileal 
brush border exposed to S. boulardii-conditioned medium revealed a diminution of 
all brush border proteins. Treatment of rats with S. boulardii suspension 
reduced fluid secretion and mannitol permeability caused by toxin A.
CONCLUSIONS: S. boulardii may reduce some of the enterotoxic effects of toxin A 
by inhibiting toxin A-receptor binding. This effect appears to be manifested by 
a secreted product of the yeast, possibly a protease.

DOI: 10.1016/0016-5085(93)90280-p
PMID: 8462799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Dairy Res. 2013 Aug;80(3):263-9. doi: 10.1017/S0022029913000216. Epub 2013 Apr 
23.

Protective effect of bifidobacteria in an experimental model of Clostridium 
difficile associated colitis.

Trejo FM(1), De Antoni GL, Pérez PF.

Author information:
(1)CCT La Plata - CONICET - Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en 
Criotecnología de Alimentos CIDCA, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad 
Nacional de La Plata, 47 y 116, La Plata 1900, Argentina.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the ability of Bifidobacterium strains to 
prevent the effects associated with Clostridium difficile infection in a hamster 
model of enterocolitis. After clindamycin treatment (30 mg/kg), animals were 
infected intragastrically with C. difficile (5×108 CFU per animal). Seven days 
prior to antibiotic administration, probiotic treatment was started by 
administering bacterial suspensions of bifidobacteria in drinking water. Strains 
CIDCA 531, CIDCA 5310, CIDCA 5316, CIDCA 5320, CIDCA 5323 and CIDCA 5325 were 
used. Treatment was continued during all the experimental period. Development of 
diarrhoea, enterocolitis and mortality were evaluated. All the infected animals 
belonging to the placebo group developed enterocolitis (5/5) and only two dead 
(2/5) whereas in the group administered with Bifidobacterium bifidum strain 
CIDCA 5310 the ratio of animals with enterocolitis or dead decreased 
significantly (1/5 and 0/5 respectively). Biological activity of caecum contents 
was evaluated in vitro on Vero cells. Animals treated with strain CIDCA 5310 
presented lower biological activity than those belonging to the placebo group. 
The present study shows the potential of selected strains of bifidobacteria to 
antagonise, in vivo, the virulence of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1017/S0022029913000216
PMID: 23611644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Roum Arch Microbiol Immunol. 1992 Oct-Dec;51(4):253-62.

Contributions to the taxonomy and biology of Clostridium difficile.

Bittner J(1), Macovei A, Lemeni D, Arboreanu D, Potorac E.

Author information:
(1)Cantacuzino Institute, Bucharest, Romania.

Clostridium difficile was incriminated by Hughes and Jarvis (1987) as a cause of 
intestinal infections in USA in the 1980-1984 period in 45 p. 100 of cases, 
whereas Salmonellae only in 12 p. 100. Four strains of this organism are studied 
in this paper in comparison with ten strains of C. bifermentans and six of C. 
sordellii, because the three species share a common antigen and have other 
common characteristics, as well. However, spores of C. difficile swell the 
bacteria and those of other bacteria (C. bifermentans and C. sordellii) do not; 
C. difficile does not produce indole, whereas the other species produce it. We 
confirmed the selective capacity of the medium of George et al. (1979) using the 
"alcohol shock" and as selective agents cycloserine D and cefoxitin. C. 
difficile proved to be most susceptible to metronidazole and rifampin. Whereas 
the former antibiotic was considered as a cause of post-antibiotic intestinal 
infections by different authors, the second was not, to our knowledge. The 
strain 10463 has a considerable toxicity (1000 DLM/ml for the white mouse, and 
pathogenicity--2000--5000 DCL for the white mouse, as compared to 25 DCL of the 
other three strains). Using this toxin an antitoxic serum was obtained in horse, 
with a capacity of neutralizing the action of the toxin up to a dilution of 1 p. 
1000.

PMID: 1304829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Am J Clin Nutr. 1980 Nov;33(11 Suppl):2527-32. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/33.11.2527.

Studies on the epidemiology of antibiotic-associated Clostridium difficile 
colitis.

Fekety R, Kim KH, Batts DH, Browne RA, Cudmore MA, Silva J Jr, Toshniwal R, 
Wilson KH.

Vancomycin protects hamsters from the development of Clostridium difficile 
colitis after treatment with clindamycin, and vancomycin is useful in treatment 
of humans with the disease. Relapses have occurred in both hamsters and humans 
when vancomycin is discontinued. Vancomycin appears to enhance susceptibility to 
colonization with C. difficile by eliminating competing intestinal organisms. 
The nature of these organisms is not known, but various tools are now available 
to aid in identifying them. Cancer chemotherapeutic agents should be added to 
the list of factors such as surgery and antibiotics that may predispose to 
emergence of C. difficile. The number of organisms required for colonization of 
antibiotic-treated hamsters is low and cross-infection seems to play a role in 
the disease in hamster colonies. The organism can be detected on surfaces in 
rooms of patients with the disease, and on the hands of personnel caring for 
them. Outbreaks of the disease have been recognized. Our results suggest 
isolation precautions should be used to prevent spread of the organism from 
patients with the disease to others being treated with antibiotics.

DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/33.11.2527
PMID: 7435424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Gastroenterology. 1994 Sep;107(3):657-65. doi: 10.1016/0016-5085(94)90112-0.

Neuronal involvement in the intestinal effects of Clostridium difficile toxin A 
and Vibrio cholerae enterotoxin in rat ileum.

Castagliuolo I(1), LaMont JT, Letourneau R, Kelly C, O'Keane JC, Jaffer A, 
Theoharides TC, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Boston University School of Medicine/The 
University Hospital, Massachusetts.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 1995 Jul;109(1):332-3.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Activation of intestinal mast cells and neurons is involved in 
intestinal inflammation and diarrhea. This study compared the effects of 
neuronal inhibitors and inhibition of intestinal sensory afferent nerves on the 
intestinal actions of Clostridium difficile toxin A, an inflammatory 
enterotoxin, and cholera toxin, a noninflammatory enterotoxin.
METHODS: The effects of lidocaine, hexamethonium, atropine, and long-term 
pretreatment of capsaicin on fluid secretion, mannitol permeability, 
myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity, and release of rat mast cell protease II 
(RMCPII) were measured in toxin A- and cholera toxin-exposed loops in vivo.
RESULTS: Lidocaine, hexamethonium, and capsaicin, but not atropine, inhibited 
toxin A-mediated secretion and MPO activity, but only capsaicin reduced mannitol 
permeability. Lidocaine, but not capsaicin, reduced secretion and permeability 
caused by cholera toxin. Toxin A caused release of RMCPII from rat ileum in vivo 
and in vitro; this was inhibited by lidocaine or capsaicin, whereas cholera 
toxin had no effect on release of RMCPII.
CONCLUSIONS: Neuronal mechanisms are important in the in vivo effects of these 
two enterotoxins. Capsaicin-sensitive sensory afferent neurons and mast cells 
are involved in the intestinal mechanism of toxin A, but not cholera toxin.

DOI: 10.1016/0016-5085(94)90112-0
PMID: 7915699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Med Microbiol. 1998 Oct;47(10):879-88. doi: 10.1099/00222615-47-10-879.

Binding of Clostridium difficile toxin A to human milk secretory component.

Dallas SD(1), Rolfe RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Texas Tech 
University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock 79430, USA.

Toxigenic Clostridium difficile is isolated from a majority of healthy human 
infants. The exact mechanism of asymptomatic colonisation is unclear; however, 
previous studies in this laboratory have shown that components of both the 
immunoglobulin and non-immunoglobulin fractions of human milk bind to toxin A 
and prevent its interaction with hamster intestinal brush border membranes 
(BBMs). Secretory IgA (sIgA) is the primary immunoglobulin found in human milk. 
As sIgA resists digestion in the infant stomach and passes at high levels into 
the colon, its ability to bind toxin A was the subject of this investigation. 
Purified sIgA in concentrations at and below those found in human milk inhibited 
the binding of toxin A to purified BBM receptors. Heating sIgA to 100 degrees C 
for 5 min did not affect its inhibitory activity. IgM, IgG and serum IgA did not 
appreciably inhibit the binding of toxin A to BBM receptors. SDS-PAGE separated 
sIgA into three major bands: secretory component, heavy chains and light chains. 
Autoradiography with radiolabelled toxin A revealed that toxin A bound to the 
secretory component (SC) of sIgA. When the three purified subunits of sIgA were 
coated on to microtitration wells, SC bound significantly more toxin A than the 
heavy or light chains of sIgA. Purified SC also inhibited toxin binding to 
receptors in a dose-dependent fashion similar to sIgA. The heavy and light 
chains of sIgA did not inhibit toxin A receptor binding. Removing carbohydrates 
from sIgA and SC by enzymic digestion showed that toxin A binds much less to 
deglycosylated SC than to glycosylated SC. These data suggest that SC in human 
milk binds to toxin A and may function as a receptor analogue, protecting human 
infants against C. difficile-associated disease.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-47-10-879
PMID: 9788811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Gastroenterology. 2005 May;128(5):1306-16. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2005.03.017.

The role of leukotriene B4 in Clostridium difficile toxin A-induced ileitis in 
rats.

McVey DC(1), Vigna SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridium difficile toxin A is a potent intestinal 
inflammatory agent that has been shown to act at least partially by neurogenic 
mechanisms involving activation of the transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 
(TRPV1) (capsaicin) receptor. We tested the hypothesis that leukotriene B4 
(LTB4) mediates the effects of toxin A via activation of the TRPV1 receptor.
METHODS: Isolated rat ileal segments were pretreated with pharmacologic agents 
before intraluminal injection of toxin A or LTB4. After 3 hours, the treated 
segments were removed and inflammation was assessed by luminal fluid 
accumulation, myeloperoxidase activity, and histology.
RESULTS: LTB4 caused ileitis similar to that caused by toxin A and antagonism of 
TRPV1 receptors but not LTB4 receptors inhibited LTB4-induced inflammation. LTB4 
also stimulated TRPV1-mediated substance P release and pretreatment with a 
specific substance P-receptor antagonist blocked LTB4-induced substance P action 
and ileitis. Inhibition of the LTB4 biosynthetic enzyme 5-lipoxygenase inhibited 
toxin A-induced increases in ileal LTB4 levels and toxin A- but not LTB4-induced 
ileitis.
CONCLUSIONS: LTB4 mediates the inflammatory effects of toxin A via activation of 
TRPV1 receptors.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2005.03.017
PMID: 15887113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Anaerobe. 2016 Aug;40:76-84. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.06.005. Epub 2016 Jun 
14.

A MLST Clade 2 Clostridium difficile strain with a variant TcdB induces severe 
inflammatory and oxidative response associated with mucosal disruption.

Costa CL(1), López-Ureña D(2), de Oliveira Assis T(3), Ribeiro RA(4), Silva 
RO(5), Rupnik M(6), Wilcox MH(7), de Carvalho AF(8), do Carmo AO(8), Dias AA(8), 
de Carvalho CB(9), Chaves-Olarte E(2), Rodríguez C(2), Quesada-Gómez C(10), de 
Castro Brito GA(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Morphology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, 
Fortaleza, CE, Brazil; Laboratory of Bacteriology, Department of Pathology, 
Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil.
(2)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica.
(3)Department of Morphology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, 
Fortaleza, CE, Brazil; Department of Morphology, Federal University of Paraíba, 
João Pessoa, PB, Brazil.
(4)Haroldo Juaçaba Hospital, Cancer Institute of Ceará, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil; 
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Federal University of Ceará, 
Fortaleza, CE, Brazil.
(5)Veterinary School, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, MG, 
Brazil.
(6)University of Maribor, Faculty of Medicine and National Laboratory for 
Health, Environment and Food, Maribor, Slovenia.
(7)Department of Microbiology, Leeds Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, The General 
Infirmary, Leeds, UK.
(8)Experimental Genetics and Laboratory Animal Science, Department of General 
Biology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Minas Gerais, 
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(9)Laboratory of Bacteriology, Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza, CE, Brazil.
(10)Facultad de Microbiología and Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades 
Tropicales, Universidad de Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica. Electronic address: 
carlos.quesada@ucr.ac.cr.
(11)Department of Morphology, Faculty of Medicine, Federal University of Ceará, 
Fortaleza, CE, Brazil. Electronic address: gerlybrito@hotmail.com.

The epidemiology of Clostridium difficile infections is highly dynamic as new 
strains continue to emerge worldwide. Here we present a detailed analysis of a 
new C. difficile strain (ICC-45) recovered from a cancer patient in Brazil that 
died from severe diarrhea. A polyphasic approach assigned a new PCR-ribotype and 
PFGE macrorestriction pattern to strain ICC-45, which is toxigenic (tcdA(+), 
tcdB(+) and ctdB(+)) and classified as ST41 from MLST Clade 2 and toxinotype 
IXb. Strain ICC-45 encodes for a variant TcdB that induces a distinct CPE in 
agreement with its toxinotype. Unlike epidemic NAP1/027 strains, which are also 
classified to MLST Clade 2, strain ICC-45 is susceptible to fluoroquinolones and 
does not overproduce toxins TcdA and TcdB. However, supernatants from strain 
ICC-45 and a NAP1/027 strain produced similar expression of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, epithelial damage, and oxidative stress response in the mouse ileal 
loop model. These results highlight inflammation and oxidative stress as common 
features in the pathogenesis of C. difficile Clade 2 strains. Finally, this work 
contributes to the description of differences in virulence among various 
C. difficile strains.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2016.06.005
PMID: 27311833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Infect Immun. 2001 Jan;69(1):599-601. doi: 10.1128/IAI.69.1.599-601.2001.

Cytosolic delivery and characterization of the TcdB glucosylating domain by 
using a heterologous protein fusion.

Spyres LM(1), Qa'Dan M, Meader A, Tomasek JJ, Howard EW, Ballard JD.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Botany and Microbiology, University of Oklahoma, Norman, 
Oklahoma 73019-0245, USA.

TcdB from Clostridium difficile glucosylates small GTPases (Rho, Rac, and Cdc42) 
and is an important virulence factor in the human disease pseudomembranous 
colitis. In these experiments, in-frame genetic fusions between the genes for 
the 255 amino-terminal residues of anthrax toxin lethal factor (LFn) and the 
TcdB(1-556) coding region were constructed, expressed, and purified from 
Escherichia coli. LFnTcdB(1-556) was enzymatically active and glucosylated 
recombinant RhoA, Rac, Cdc42, and substrates from cell extracts. LFnTcdB(1-556) 
plus anthrax toxin protective antigen intoxicated cultured mammalian cells and 
caused actin reorganization and mouse lethality, all similar to those caused by 
wild-type TcdB.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.69.1.599-601.2001
PMCID: PMC97927
PMID: 11119561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Immunol Lett. 1997 Jan;55(1):19-26. doi: 10.1016/s0165-2478(96)02678-8.

Hepatobiliary transport of IgA in the golden Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus 
auratus).

Vaerman JP(1), Langendries A.

Author information:
(1)Catholic University of Louvain, International Institute of Cellular and 
Molecular Pathology, Brussels, Belgium. vaerman@mexp.ucl.ac.be

Do hamsters, like rats, rabbits and mice, possess an hepatocyte 'IgA pump' 
whereby circulating plasma polymeric IgA (pIgA) is actively transported into 
bile, against a concentration gradient, via the polymeric Ig receptor or 
secretory component (SC)? Precipitating antisera, raised against rat Igs and 
serum proteins, and crossreacting with their hamster homologues, detected 
hamster SC by immunoelectrophoresis in bile, but not serum. Gel filtration of 
hamster bile indicated that free SC eluted between IgG and albumin, as for other 
mammals. Hamster bile IgA was pIgA, and was true secretory IgA (SIgA) by its 
reaction with anti-SC antiserum and by SDS-PAGE with reduction. Hamster serum 
IgA comprised both pIgA and IgA monomers. Mean bile-to-serum concentration 
ratios (B/S) for IgA, IgG, transferrin and albumin, measured by radial 
immunodiffusion, were 2.65, 0.019, 0.024, and 0.016, respectively, demonstrating 
strongly selective enrichment of bile in IgA. Human 125I-labelled dimeric IgA 
was injected into the circulation of five hamsters with cannulated bile ducts; 
20% of the [125I]IgA (> 95% precipitable by trichloroacetic acid) was recovered 
in bile within 5 h, a figure close to that for mice, but smaller than that for 
rats and rabbits. The data suggest that bile significantly contributes to 
hamster intestinal SIgA, as shown for rats, rabbits and mice. This could be 
relevant to studies where hamsters are used as an experimental model for 
infection by the human intestinal pathogen, Clostridium difficile.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-2478(96)02678-8
PMID: 9093877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Lab Invest. 1989 Oct;61(4):419-25.

Clostridium difficile toxin A. Interactions with mucus and early sequential 
histopathologic effects in rabbit small intestine.

Lima AA(1), Innes DJ Jr, Chadee K, Lyerly DM, Wilkins TD, Guerrant RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville.

Clostridium difficile produces two toxins, A (enterotoxic) and B (cytopathic), 
that are implicated in the pathogenesis of pseudomembranous colitis. However, 
the relationship of the secretory effect and the early histopathologic events is 
still unclear. We examined the early histopathologic effect of purified C. 
difficile toxin A in rabbit ileal loops and correlated the mucosal damage with 
the secretory response. As early as 2 hours after inoculation, toxin A at 1.0 
micrograms caused cytolysis of the basal portion of the apical epithelia cells. 
Electron microscopy showed the basal portions of the absorptive epithelial cells 
necrotic. No significant fluid accumulation occurred after 2 or 4 hours in ileal 
loops inoculated with either 0.1 or 1.0 micrograms toxin A. In contrast, with 
3-10 micrograms toxin A there was significant hemorrhagic fluid accumulation 
after 2 hours that correlated with the severity of the histologic lesions. An 
early mucoid exudate was demonstrated not to be related to a mucus secretagogue 
effect of toxin A. Prior exposure of toxin A to rabbit intestinal mucus 
preparations did not alter its subsequent enterotoxic or cytopathic (Chinese 
hamster ovary cells) effects. These studies demonstrate that the early 
intestinal tissue damage by toxin A was dose and time dependent and involved 
disruption of the basal portions of the absorptive epithelial cells with marked 
separation of the cells along the mucosal surfaces that preceded the secretory 
response.

PMID: 2507823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2016 Dec;69(12):879-884. doi: 10.1038/ja.2016.45. Epub 2016 
May 18.

Preclinical development of Ramizol, an antibiotic belonging to a new class, for 
the treatment of Clostridium difficile colitis.

Rao S(1), Prestidge CA(1), Miesel L(2), Sweeney D(3), Shinabarger DL(3), Boulos 
RA(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy and Medical Science, University of South Australia, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(2)Eurofins Panlabs Ltd, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Micromyx LLC., Kalamazoo, MI, USA.
(4)School of Chemical and Physical Sciences, Flinders University, Bedford Park, 
SA, Australia.
(5)Antibiotic Development, Boulos & Cooper Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd, Port 
Adelaide, SA, Australia.

Antibiotic-resistant bacteria is a major threat to human health and is predicted 
to become the leading cause of death from disease by 2050. Despite the recent 
resurgence of research and development in the area, few antibiotics have reached 
the market, with most of the recently approved antibiotics corresponding to new 
uses for old antibiotics, or structurally similar derivatives thereof. We have 
recently reported an in silico approach that led to the design of an entirely 
new class of antibiotics for the bacteria-specific mechanosensitive ion channel 
of large conductance: MscL. Here, we present the preclinical development of one 
such antibiotic, Ramizol, a first generation antibiotic belonging to that class. 
We present the lack of interaction between Ramizol and other mammalian channels 
adding credibility to its MscL selectivity. We determine the pharmacokinetic 
profile in a rat model and show <0.1% of Ramizol is absorbed systemically. We 
show this non-systemic nature of the antibiotic translates to over 70% survival 
of hamsters in a Clostridium difficile colitis model. Lastly, initial in vitro 
data indicate that resistance to Ramizol occurs at a low frequency. In 
conclusion, we establish the potential of Ramizol as an effective new treatment 
for C. difficile associated disease.

DOI: 10.1038/ja.2016.45
PMCID: PMC5399159
PMID: 27189122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RAB is the Chief Executive Officer of Boulos & 
Cooper Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd, which owns the intellectual property. The 
remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.


401. Infect Immun. 1986 Sep;53(3):573-81. doi: 10.1128/IAI.53.3.573-581.1986.

Cell surface binding site for Clostridium difficile enterotoxin: evidence for a 
glycoconjugate containing the sequence Gal alpha 1-3Gal beta 1-4GlcNAc.

Krivan HC, Clark GF, Smith DF, Wilkins TD.

This study was undertaken to determine whether a binding site for Clostridium 
difficile enterotoxin (toxin A) exists in the brush border membranes (BBMs) of 
the hamster, an animal known to be extremely sensitive to the action of the 
toxin. Toxin A was the only antigen adsorbed by the BBMs from the culture 
filtrate of C. difficile. The finding that binding activity could not be 
destroyed by heat indicated that a carbohydrate moiety might be involved. We 
therefore examined erythrocytes from various animal species for binding activity 
since erythrocytes provide a variety of carbohydrate sequences on their cell 
surfaces. Only rabbit erythrocytes bound the toxin, and the cells agglutinated. 
A binding assay based on an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay method for 
quantifying C. difficile toxin A was used to compare binding of the toxin to 
hamster BBMs, rabbit erythrocytes, and BBMs from rats, which are less 
susceptible to the action of C. difficile toxin A than hamsters. Results of this 
comparison indicated the following order of toxin-binding frequency: rabbit 
erythrocytes greater than hamster BBMs greater than rat BBMs. Binding of toxin A 
to hamster BBMs at 37 degrees C was comparable to what has been observed with 
cholera toxin, but binding was enhanced at 4 degrees C. A similar binding 
phenomenon was observed with rabbit erythrocytes. Examination of the cell 
surfaces of hamster BBMs and rabbit erythrocytes with lectins and specific 
glycosidases revealed a high concentration of terminal alpha-linked galactose. 
Treatment of both membrane types with alpha-galactosidase destroyed the binding 
activity. The glycoprotein, calf thyroglobulin, also bound the toxin and 
inhibited toxin binding to cells. Toxin A did not bind to human erythrocytes 
from blood group A, B, or O donors. However, after fucosidase treatment of human 
erythrocytes, only blood group B erythrocytes, which possess the blood group B 
structure Gal alpha 1-3[Fuc alpha 1-2]Gal beta 1-4GlcNAc-R, bound the toxin. 
This indicated that toxin A was likely binding to Gal alpha 1-3Gal beta 
1-4GlcNAc, a carbohydrate sequence also found on calf thyroglobulin and rabbit 
erythrocytes. All of the results indicate that hamster BBMs contain a 
carbohydrate-binding site for toxin A that has at least a Gal alpha 1-3Gal beta 
1-4GlcNAc nonreducing terminal sequence.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.53.3.573-581.1986
PMCID: PMC260829
PMID: 3744552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Clin Microbiol. 1983 Aug;18(2):242-7. doi: 10.1128/JCM.18.2.242-247.1983.

Enzyme immunoassay for detection of antibody to toxins A and B of Clostridium 
difficile.

Viscidi RP, Yolken RH, Laughon BE, Bartlett JG.

An enzyme immunoassay (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) to detect 
hamster antibody to toxins A and B of Clostridium difficile was developed in 
which toxin preparations are used to coat the solid phase. The specificity of 
the assay was supported by blocking tests with the toxin preparations and 
proteins from a nontoxigenic strain. Sera from immunized and control hamsters 
were tested by this technique, and results were compared with those from a 
cytotoxicity neutralization assay. Antibody to toxins A and B assayed by ELISA 
showed a close quantitative correlation with antibody titers obtained by 
cytotoxicity neutralization. The ELISA assays described appear to provide a 
sensitive, specific, and practical method to define the prevalence of antibody 
to C. difficile toxins. These assays could be readily applied to human sera to 
examine and study the immune response of patients with C. difficile-induced 
disease.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.18.2.242-247.1983
PMCID: PMC270785
PMID: 6619280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;646:229-37. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60327-365-7_15.

Methods for working with the mouse model.

Collignon A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Paris Sud, Châtenay Malabry, France.

Mouse models have been developed to study the pathogenic process of Clostridium 
difficile infections, first the intestinal colonization and second the toxin 
production. These models have also been used to test the role of environmental 
conditions that modulate infection. Different mouse models have been used 
successfully to study C. difficile infections such as conventional mice, 
gnotobiotic mouse models including the monoxenic C. difficile mouse model, and 
the human microbiota-associated mouse model. The advantages and disadvantages of 
these models are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-60327-365-7_15
PMID: 20597013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Infect Dis. 1985 Feb;151(2):355-61. doi: 10.1093/infdis/151.2.355.

Population dynamics of ingested Clostridium difficile in the gastrointestinal 
tract of the Syrian hamster.

Wilson KH, Sheagren JN, Freter R.

The population dynamics of Clostridium difficile in the hamster gastrointestinal 
tract were studied after intragastric inoculation with organisms and a 51Cr 
tracer. Seventy-eight percent of spores germinated within the small intestine 
within 1 hr. Germinated spores and vegetative cells both showed two phases of 
elimination from the hamster cecum--an initial phase of rapid death that was not 
affected by antibiotic treatment followed by a phase of complete inhibition of 
multiplication. The latter phase of inhibition was not seen in 
antibiotic-treated animals and was thus attributable to the indigenous flora. 
The 51Cr tracer mixed well with cecal contents and was eliminated exponentially 
with a dilution rate constant ranging from -0.46/hr to -0.31/hr in normal 
hamsters. The hamster cecum was therefore dynamically analogous to a continuous 
flow system, a finding supporting the concept that anaerobic continuous flow 
cultures are useful in vitro models of the cecal ecosystem.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/151.2.355
PMID: 3968453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Med Microbiol. 1996 Aug;45(2):133-7. doi: 10.1099/00222615-45-2-133.

The distribution of Clostridium difficile in the environment of South Wales.

al Saif N(1), Brazier JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University Hospital of Wales, Heath Park, 
Cardiff.

A large study of the distribution of Clostridium difficile in the environment of 
the Cardiff area of South Wales was performed with a methodology designed to 
maximise recovery. A total of 2580 samples was taken, with 184 (7.1%) yielding 
isolates. The highest yield for C. difficile was obtained from river waters, 
with 14 (87.5%) of 16 samples from four rivers positive, and from sea water 
samples with 7 (44%) of 15 positive from six beaches on the Bristol Channel. In 
addition, 7 (46.7%) of 15 samples of lake water were also positive. Twenty-two 
(21%) of 104 soil samples, taken from random sites in Cardiff, were positive, as 
were 20% of environmental samples from four Cardiff hospitals. C. difficile was 
also isolated from 50% of eight swimming pool waters examined and 1 (5.5%) of 18 
of mains tap water. Carriage of C. difficile in 524 faecal samples of assorted 
farm animals was c. 1%, and was 10% in dogs and 2% in cats. In private 
residences, the organism was present in 12 (2.2%) of 550 samples. While 2.4% of 
300 raw vegetable samples were positive, none of 107 assorted fish gut contents 
was. These findings indicate that C. difficile may be more widely distributed in 
the general environment, particularly water, than was previously thought.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-45-2-133
PMID: 8683549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Infect Dis. 1986 Mar;153(3):547-51. doi: 10.1093/infdis/153.3.547.

Gnotobiotic models for study of the microbial ecology of Clostridium difficile 
and Escherichia coli.

Wilson KH, Sheagren JN, Freter R, Weatherbee L, Lyerly D.

Hamster flora introduced into germfree mice reduced the cecum to conventional 
size, suppressed populations of Escherichia coli and Clostridium difficile to 
the same degree that mouse flora did, and corrected the hypocellularity that is 
characteristic of the small bowel of germfree mice. A highly toxigenic strain of 
C. difficile readily induced cecitis in germfree and antibiotic-treated 
conventional mice, and histological examination frequently revealed 
pseudomembranes. Toxins A and B were both detected in ceca of animals with 
colitis. Gnotobiotic mice provide a model in which to study the role of the 
indigenous microflora in protecting against antibiotic-associated colitis.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/153.3.547
PMID: 3512730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Infect Immun. 1987 Jul;55(7):1686-91. doi: 10.1128/IAI.55.7.1686-1691.1987.

Role of volatile fatty acids in colonization resistance to Clostridium difficile 
in gnotobiotic mice.

Su WJ, Waechter MJ, Bourlioux P, Dolegeal M, Fourniat J, Mahuzier G.

Clostridium difficile is an agent involved in the development of 
antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis. The purpose of this work was to 
investigate the role of volatile fatty acids (VFAs) in resistance to 
colonization by C. difficile by using a gnotobiotic animal model. Accordingly, 
germfree mice were associated with different hamster flora, and the VFAs in 
their cecal contents were measured by gas chromatography. The results showed 
that VFAs were produced mainly by the intestinal flora, especially by the 
strictly anaerobic bacteria. In these associated mice, the concentrations of 
acetic, propionic, and butyric acids were higher than those of other acids, but 
at pH 6.8 the MICs of these three acids in vitro for C. difficile were more than 
200 mu eq/ml. In gnotobiotic mice monoassociated with C. difficile and in the 
isolated ceca of these mice, VFAs did not inhibit the growth of C. difficile. In 
gnotobiotic mice which were diassociated with C. difficile and C. butyricum and 
given drinking water with a lactose concentration of 20%, the cecal contents 
included about the same amount of butyric acid as did those of the 
monoassociated mice, although the population of C. difficile remained the same. 
Therefore, it is suggested that VFAs alone cannot inhibit intestinal 
colonization by C. difficile and that, consequently, other inhibitory mechanisms 
are also present.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.55.7.1686-1691.1987
PMCID: PMC260579
PMID: 3596806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Vet Intern Med. 2010 May-Jun;24(3):628-32. doi: 
10.1111/j.1939-1676.2010.00506.x. Epub 2010 Apr 6.

Validation of a commercial enzyme immunoassay for detection of Clostridium 
difficile toxins in feces of horses with acute diarrhea.

Medina-Torres CE(1), Weese JS, Staempfli HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada. cemedinat@unal.edu.co

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a recognized cause of 
colitis in the horse. Identification of its toxins is important for management 
of individual cases and for prevention of transmission and zoonosis. In humans, 
CDI diagnosis is performed with enzyme immunoassays, none of which have been 
validated for horses.
HYPOTHESIS/OBJECTIVES: (1) Establish which test for CDI diagnosis was more 
frequently used by diagnostic laboratories, (2) determine the identified test's 
performance, sensitivity, and specificity, and (3) validate its use in diarrheic 
horses.
ANIMALS: Samples were obtained from 72 horses presented with acute diarrhea and 
hospitalized at the Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph.
METHODS: A survey was conducted to establish which of the tests for CDI 
diagnosis in horses is most commonly used throughout North America. A 
questionnaire was sent to all laboratories registered in the Veterinary 
Infection Control Society and the American Association of Veterinary Laboratory 
Diagnosticians. The performance of the test was evaluated by comparison to a 
cell cytotoxicity assay (CTA), the accepted Gold Standard for C. difficile toxin 
detection.
RESULTS: The Techlab C. difficile Tox A/B II ELISA was the most frequently used 
test. Compared with the CTA, no significant difference was observed, and a good 
level of agreement (93%) was obtained. The diagnostic performance of the ELISA 
test was adequate (84% sensitivity and 96% specificity).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Results demonstrate that the Techlab C. 
difficile Tox A/B II ELISA is a reliable, adequate, and practical tool for 
identification of C. difficile toxins in horse feces.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-1676.2010.00506.x
PMID: 20384955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Gut. 1980 Jun;21(6):493-9. doi: 10.1136/gut.21.6.493.

Mucosal damage mediated by clostridial toxin in experimental 
clindamycin-associated colitis.

Abrams GD, Allo M, Rifkin GD, Fekety R, Silva J Jr.

A toxin produced by Clostridium difficile has been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of antibiotic-associated colitis in humans and experimental 
animals. This study was undertaken in order to define the sequential evolution 
of caecal mucosal lesions in the hamster and to relate those lesions directly to 
the clostridial toxin. Sterile filtrates from a culture of C. difficile and from 
caecal contents of clindamycin-treated hamsters were studied with respect to 
their effects on the caecal mucosa and on cultured cell monolayers. The toxic 
filtrates both produced cellular swelling in vitro, and appeared to have a 
similar cytotoxic effect on caecal epithelial cells in vivo. Cellular damage was 
followed by extensive epithelial desquamation and the evolution of an acute 
pseudomembranous typhlitis. The pathogenetic sequence produced by the filtrates 
was identical with that previously described after direct clindamycin treatment. 
These findings demonstrate that intraluminal clostridial toxin can mediate 
development of the characteristic antibiotic-associated mucosal lesions.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.21.6.493
PMCID: PMC1419662
PMID: 6776012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 Mar 9;1546(1):171-84. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4838(01)00138-8.

Analysis of the physicochemical interactions between Clostridium difficile 
toxins and cholestyramine using liquid chromatography with post-column 
derivatization.

Palace GP(1), Lazari P, Norton K.

Author information:
(1)Analytical Chemistry Department, GelTex Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 153 Second 
Avenue, Waltham, MA 02451, USA. gpalace@geltex.com

A potential therapy for antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis is to 
bind Clostridium difficile toxins A and B using cholestyramine, a hydrophobic 
anion exchange medium. Frontal analysis in isotonic phosphate buffer was studied 
using post-column derivatization with o-phthalaldehyde, which gave a highly 
sensitive (> or =30 ng) flow-through analysis. Following load (1.5-3.0 microg 
toxin/3.6 mg), toxin A was bound at a slightly higher capacity than B, due to 
slower kinetics. A salt gradient eluted roughly 20% of bound toxin A with 0.6 M 
NaCl and toxin B with 1.1 M NaCl, hence toxin A showed weaker electrostatic 
affinity. The remainder of toxin A (65%) and some of toxin B (10% out of 50%) 
were eluted using a subsequent gradient to 60% acetonitrile in normal saline, 
which measured predominantly hydrophobic binding. Low and high affinity 
populations of both toxins were observed. Glycocholic acid or amino acids were 
competitive binders, although these components had little effect on the toxin A 
population bound primarily through ionic interactions. Competitive protein 
constituents in hamster cecal contents were also profiled. These results help to 
explain the variable clinical response in using cholestyramine to treat colitis. 
Using quaternary amine-polyhydroxymethacrylate (PHM) ion exchange 
chromatography, a trend for increased binding at higher pH was observed, 
especially for toxin A. Binding to strong cation exchange resins (sulfonate-PHM) 
was not observed. A range of reversed phase media retained both toxins, although 
recovery was very poor relative to protein standards. Size exclusion 
chromatography with light scattering detection showed that toxin B exists in 
different aggregation states, while toxin A remains monomeric.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4838(01)00138-8
PMID: 11257520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015 Nov;70(11):3061-9. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkv231. Epub 
2015 Aug 18.

Gastrointestinal localization of metronidazole by a lactobacilli-inspired 
tetramic acid motif improves treatment outcomes in the hamster model of 
Clostridium difficile infection.

Cherian PT(1), Wu X(2), Yang L(1), Scarborough JS(1), Singh AP(3), Alam ZA(4), 
Lee RE(1), Hurdle JG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Texas, Arlington, TX 76019, USA Center 
for Infectious and Inflammatory Diseases, Institute of Biosciences and 
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical Biology and Therapeutics, St Jude Children's Research 
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA Biomedical Sciences Program, Graduate Health 
Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Texas, Arlington, TX 76019, USA.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Texas, Arlington, TX 76019, USA Center 
for Infectious and Inflammatory Diseases, Institute of Biosciences and 
Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA Department 
of Microbial and Molecular Pathogenesis, Texas A&M Health Science Center, 
College of Medicine, Bryan, TX 77807, USA jhurdle@ibt.tamhsc.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Metronidazole, a mainstay treatment for Clostridium difficile 
infection (CDI), is often ineffective for severe CDI. Whilst this is thought to 
arise from suboptimal levels of metronidazole in the colon due to rapid 
absorption, empirical validation is lacking. In contrast, reutericyclin, an 
antibacterial tetramic acid from Lactobacillus reuteri, concentrates in the 
gastrointestinal tract. In this study, we modified metronidazole with 
reutericyclin's tetramic acid motif to obtain non-absorbed compounds, enabling 
assessment of the impact of pharmacokinetics on treatment outcomes.
METHODS: A series of metronidazole-bearing tetramic acid substituents were 
synthesized and evaluated in terms of anti-C. difficile activities, gastric 
permeability, in vivo pharmacokinetics, efficacy in the hamster model of CDI and 
mode of action.
RESULTS: Most compounds were absorbed less than metronidazole in cell-based 
Caco-2 permeability assays. In hamsters, lead compounds compartmentalized in the 
colon rather than the bloodstream with negligible levels detected in the blood, 
in direct contrast with metronidazole, which was rapidly absorbed into the blood 
and was undetectable in caecum. Accordingly, four leads were more efficacious 
(P < 0.05) than metronidazole in C. difficile-infected animals. Improved 
efficacy was not due to an alternative mode of action, as the leads retained the 
mode of action of metronidazole.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides the clearest empirical evidence that the high 
absorption of metronidazole lowers treatment outcomes for CDI and suggests a 
role for the tetramic acid motif for colon-specific drug delivery. This approach 
also has the potential to lower systemic toxicity and drug interactions of 
nitroheterocyclic drugs for treating gastrointestine-specific diseases.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For Permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkv231
PMCID: PMC4677261
PMID: 26286574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Infect Immun. 1988 Oct;56(10):2610-4. doi: 10.1128/IAI.56.10.2610-2614.1988.

Role of competition for nutrients in suppression of Clostridium difficile by the 
colonic microflora.

Wilson KH(1), Perini F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Durham Veterans Administration Medical Center, North 
Carolina 27705.

The cecal flora of mice is able to eliminate Clostridium difficile from the 
mouse cecum even when C. difficile is the first organism established. We used a 
continuous-flow (CF) culture model of the cecal flora to investigate the 
possibility that competition for nutrients is one mechanism for this antagonism. 
The medium for the CF cultures consisted of homogenates of fecal pellets from 
germfree mice. Carbohydrate analysis showed that mouse flora depleted 74 to 
99.8% of the various carbohydrates from this environment-simulating medium. When 
inoculated into filtrates made from CF cultures of mouse flora, C. difficile 
multiplied slower than the dilution rate of the CF cultures unless glucose, 
N-acetylglucosamine, or N-acetylneuraminic acid was added. C. difficile did not 
synthesize hydrolytic enzymes able to cleave these monosaccharides from 
oligosaccharide side chains. As found previously, veal infusion broth did not 
support the growth of a microflora that could be transferred to gnotobiotic mice 
and fully suppress C. difficile. When mucin or monosaccharides found in mucin 
were added to veal infusion broth, the flora functioned normally in this regard. 
These data suggest that as yet unidentified organisms compete more efficiently 
than C. difficile for monomeric glucose, N-acetylglucosamine, and sialic acids 
found in colonic contents.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.56.10.2610-2614.1988
PMCID: PMC259619
PMID: 3417352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Exp Med. 1969 Apr 1;129(4):747-56. doi: 10.1084/jem.129.4.747.

Autoantibodies to colon in germfree rats monocontaminated with Clostridium 
difficile.

Hammarström S, Perlmann P, Gustafsson BE, Lagercrantz R.

Germfree rats monocontaminated with the anaerobic microorganisms Clostridium 
difficile or another Clostridium species (strain G 62) produce auto-antibodies 
to colon antigen. The antigen can be extracted with phenol water from the feces 
of germfree rats. Antibodies, demonstrable by means of passive hemagglutination 
of antigen sensitized sheep erythrocytes appear after monocontamination for 35 
days or longer. The indirect immunofluorescence techniques, applied to sections 
of germfree rat colon, gave positive mucosal staining. The staining was similar 
to that obtained with sera from patients with ulcerative colitis or from rats 
immunized with rabbit colon. No antibodies were found in the sera of germfree 
rats, germfree rats monocontaminated with various other bacteria, conventional 
rats of germfree origin, or conventional Sprague-Dawley rats. Although the 
anti-colon antibodies of the Clostridium infected rats reacted with the same 
feces extract as the antibodies of ulcerative colitis patients or of rabbit 
colon immunized rats, their specificity was different. While the latter 
cross-react with polysaccharide from E. coli O14, those from the 
Clostridium-infected exgermfree rats did not. Rats monocontaminated with Cl. 
difficile also developed antibodies to this organism, but no cross-reaction 
between Cl. difficile antigen and colon antigen could be demonstrated. This 
speaks against breakage of tolerance by cross-reacting bacterial antigen as the 
cause of autoimmunity in these rats. Other possible mechanisms for autoantibody 
production in this model are immunogenic alteration of gastrointestinal mucins 
by bacterial degradation, adjuvant effects of bacterial products, or both.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.129.4.747
PMCID: PMC2138624
PMID: 4886046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Microbiology (Reading). 2005 Jan;151(Pt 1):199-208. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.27474-0.

Characterization of the cleavage site and function of resulting cleavage 
fragments after limited proteolysis of Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB) by 
host cells.

Rupnik M(1)(2), Pabst S(1), Rupnik M(3), von Eichel-Streiber C(4), Urlaub H(5), 
Söling HD(1).

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Neurobiology, 
Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(3)European Neuroscience Institute, Göttingen, Germany.
(4)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, 
Johannes-Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.
(5)Max-Planck-Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Cellular 
Biochemistry, Göttingen, Germany.

Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB) is a single-stranded protein consisting of 
a C-terminal domain responsible for binding to the host cell membrane, a middle 
part involved in internalization, and the N-terminal catalytic (toxic) part. 
This study shows that TcdB is processed by a single proteolytic step which 
cleaves TcdB(10463) between Leu(543) and Gly(544) and the naturally occurring 
variant TcdB(8864) between Leu(544) and Gly(545). The cleavage occurs at neutral 
pH and is catalysed by a pepstatin-sensitive protease localized in the cytoplasm 
and on the cytoplasmic face of intracellular membranes. The smaller N-terminal 
cleavage products [63 121 Da (TcdB(10463)) and 62 761 Da (TcdB(8864))] harbour 
the cytotoxic and glucosyltransferase activities of the toxins. When 
microinjected into cultured Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts, the N-terminal 
cleavage fragment shows full cytotoxic activity shortly after injection whereas 
the holotoxin initially exhibits a very low activity which, however, increases 
with time. Twenty minutes after the start of internalization of TcdB, the larger 
cleavage products [206 609 Da (TcdB(10463)) and 206 245 Da (TcdB(8864))] are 
found exclusively in a membrane fraction, whereas the N-terminal cleavage 
products appear mainly in the cytosol and associated with the membrane. This is 
in line with a proposed model according to which the longer, C-terminal, part of 
these toxins forms a channel allowing for the translocation of the toxic 
N-terminal part, which is subsequently cleaved off at the cytoplasmic face of an 
intracellular compartment, most likely endosomes.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.27474-0
PMID: 15632438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Exp Anim. 2001 Jul;50(4):293-8. doi: 10.1538/expanim.50.293.

Establishment of specific pathogen-free (SPF) rat colonies using gnotobiotic 
techniques.

Yanabe M(1), Shibuya M, Gonda T, Asai H, Tanaka T, Sudou K, Narita T, Itoh K.

Author information:
(1)Japan SLC, Inc., 95-10 Aoi-cho, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 433-8111, Japan.

Gnotobiotic Wistar rats were produced using gnotobiotic techniques, which were 
established in the production of a SPF mouse colony, in order to establish a 
barrier-sustained colony. One strain of Escherichia coli, 28 strains of 
Bacteriodaceae (B-strains), three strains of Lactobacillus (L-strains) and a 
chloroform-treated fecal suspension (CHF, Clostridium mixture) were prepared 
from conventional Wistar rats as the microflora source. Two groups of 
limited-flora rats, E. coli plus B-strains and E. coli plus CHF, were produced. 
After confirmation that Clostridium difficile was not detected in the 
CHF-inoculated rats, two groups of limited-flora rats were transferred to an 
isolator and housed together in a cage. These rats were then orally inoculated 
with L-strains. The gnotobiotic rats showed colonization resistance to 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and the number of E. coli in the feces was 10(5) to 
10(6)/g. The gnotobiotic rats were transferred to a barrier room as a source of 
intestinal flora for SPF colonies. In the SPF rats, basic cecal flora was mainly 
composed of Bacteroidaceae, clostridia, fusiform-shaped bacteria and 
lactobacilli, and did not change over a long period. Their flora became similar 
to that of conventional rats.

DOI: 10.1538/expanim.50.293
PMID: 11515091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Infect Immun. 1982 Jan;35(1):289-95. doi: 10.1128/IAI.35.1.289-295.1982.

Bacillus pumilus in the induction of clindamycin-associated enterocolitis in 
guinea pigs.

Brophy PF, Knoop FC.

Antibiotic-associated enterocolitis was induced in guinea pigs by the 
intraperitoneal injection of clindamycin. The colonic and cecal mucosa and feces 
of acutely ill animals were cultured under aerobic and anaerobic conditions on 
5% sheep blood agar plates and on a selective and differential medium for 
Clostridium difficile. All morphologically distinct colony types were isolated 
in pure culture and identified. A sterile cell-free filtrate of each isolate was 
tested for ability to induce morphological changes in cultured monolayers of 
mouse adrenal cells. The filtrate of a predominant isolate, Bacillus pumilus, 
induced an alteration of cellular morphology; the sterile filtrate of other 
isolates were unreactive. Toxin contained in cell-free filtrates of B. pumilus 
caused a syndrome identical to clindamycin-associated enterocolitis when 
injected intracecally into guinea pigs. The toxin had a molecular weight of 
6,500 daltons as determined by molecular sieve chromatography and was 
inactivated with pronase, lipase, and trypsin. The minimal inhibitory 
concentrations of clindamycin and vancomycin for B. pumilus were 50 
micrograms/ml and less than or equal to 0.4 micrograms/ml, respectively.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.35.1.289-295.1982
PMCID: PMC351028
PMID: 7033138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2009 May;21(3):377-80. doi: 10.1177/104063870902100314.

Equine colitis X associated with infection by Clostridium difficile NAP1/027.

Songer JG(1), Trinh HT, Dial SM, Brazier JS, Glock RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Science and Microbiology, 1117 East Lowell Street, 
The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA. gsonger@u.arizona.edu

A 14-year-old Quarter Horse with a 48-hr history of colic was euthanized after 
failure to respond to treatment. At necropsy, cecal and colonic mucosae were 
congested throughout, and there was segmental edema and significant thickening 
of the intestinal wall. Excessive numbers of mononuclear cells were found in 
mucosal lamina propria. Submucosal hemorrhage was diffuse and extensive, and 
Clostridium difficile toxins A and B were detected. Large numbers of C. 
difficile were isolated, and genetic characterization revealed them to be North 
American pulsed-field gel electrophoresis type 1, polymerase chain reaction 
ribotype 027, and toxinotype III. Genes for the binary toxin were present, and 
toxin negative-regulator tcdC contained an 18-bp deletion. This genotype 
comprises the current human "epidemic strain," which is associated with human C. 
difficile-associated disease of greater than historical severity. The diagnosis 
was peracute typhlocolitis, with lesions and history typical of those attributed 
to colitis X.

DOI: 10.1177/104063870902100314
PMID: 19407094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 29;271(13):7324-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.271.13.7324.

Inhibition of Fc epsilon-RI-mediated activation of rat basophilic leukemia cells 
by Clostridium difficile toxin B (monoglucosyltransferase).

Prepens U(1), Just I, von Eichel-Streiber C, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie der Albert-Ludwigs-Universität 
Freiburg, Germany.

Treatment of rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) 2H3-hm1 cells with Clostridium 
difficile toxin B (2 ng/ml), which reportedly depolymerizes the actin 
cytoskeleton, blocked [3H]serotonin release induced by 2,4-dinitrophenyl-bovine 
serum albumin, carbachol, mastoparan, and reduced ionophore A23187-stimulated 
degranulation by about 55-60%. In lysates of RBL cells, toxin B 14C-glucosylated 
two major and one minor protein. By using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis 
and immunoblotting, RhoA and Cdc42 were identified as protein substrates of 
toxin B. In contrast to toxin B, Clostridium botulinum transferase C3 that 
selectively inactivates RhoA by ADP-ribosylation did not inhibit degranulation 
up to a concentration of 150 microg/ml. Antigen-stimulated tyrosine 
phosphorylation of a 110-kDa protein was inhibited by toxin B as well as by the 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitor wortmannin. Depolymerization of the 
microfilament cytoskeleton of RBL cells by C. botulinum C2 toxin or cytochalasin 
D resulted in an increased [3H]serotonin release induced by antigen, carbachol, 
mastoparan, or by calcium ionophore A23187, but without affecting toxin 
B-induced inhibition of degranulation. The data indicate that toxin B inhibits 
activation of RBL cells by glucosylation of low molecular mass GTP-binding 
proteins of the Rho subfamily (most likely Cdc42) by a mechanism not involving 
the actin cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.271.13.7324
PMID: 8631752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


419. FEBS Lett. 1987 Dec 10;225(1-2):82-6. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(87)81135-3.

Molecular cloning and expression of Clostridium difficile toxin A in Escherichia 
coli K12.

Wren BW(1), Clayton CL, Mullany PP, Tabaqchali S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, St Bartholomews Hospital Medical College, 
West Smithfield, London, England.

Clostridium difficile toxin A was purified to homogeneity and was used to raise 
monospecific antiserum in rabbits. A gene bank of C. difficile DNA in 
Escherichia coli was constructed by cloning Sau3A-cleaved clostridial DNA 
fragments into the bacteriophage vector lambda EMBL3. Out of 4500 plaques 
screened with antitoxin A, 9 clones were positively identified. One of these 
clones lambda tA5 expressed a 235 kDa protein which exhibited a cytotonic effect 
on Chinese hamster ovary cells, and had the ability to haemagglutinate rabbit 
erythrocytes, both properties characteristic of toxin A. The size of the lambda 
tA5 insert DNA was 14.3 kb.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(87)81135-3
PMID: 2961615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Med Microbiol. 1995 Jan;42(1):10-9. doi: 10.1099/00222615-42-1-10.

Immunoglobulin and non-immunoglobulin components of human milk inhibit 
Clostridium difficile toxin A-receptor binding.

Rolfe RD(1), Song W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, Texas Tech 
University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock 79430, USA.

Clostridium difficile is isolated from the intestinal tracts of > 50% of healthy 
infants. The mechanism by which intestinal colonisation of infants by toxigenic 
C. difficile is generally asymptomatic is unknown but may reflect the presence 
in human milk of neutralising activity against C. difficile toxin A. On this 
basis, the ability of human milk to inhibit the binding of toxin A to a purified 
hamster brush border membrane receptor was determined. Ten milk samples from 
healthy volunteers in various stages of lactation inhibited the binding of toxin 
A to the receptor by an average of 90%. Heating and dialysis did not 
significantly alter the inhibitory activity of any of the milk samples. Human 
milk protected adult hamsters against a lethal challenge with toxin A but had no 
effect on the cytotoxic activity of the toxin. SDS-PAGE and ligand blot analyses 
showed that there were at least four distinct factors in human milk that 
specifically bound toxin A. Thiophilic adsorption chromatography was used to 
separate immunoglobulin from non-immunoglobulin components of human milk. IgA 
was the only immunoglobulin detected in human milk and > 90% of this 
immunoglobulin was recovered after purification by thiophilic adsorption. Both 
the unbound non-immunoglobulin and bound immunoglobulin fractions of human milk 
inhibited the binding of toxin A to the purified receptor. These results suggest 
that human milk may be important in protecting infants against C. 
difficile-associated intestinal disease.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-42-1-10
PMID: 7739018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cell Signal. 2010 Jul;22(7):1124-31. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.03.007. Epub 
2010 Mar 6.

Pleiotropic role of Rac in mast cell activation revealed by a cell permeable 
Bordetella dermonecrotic fusion toxin.

Stratmann H(1), Schwan C, Orth JH, Schmidt G, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Germany.

To activate the GTPase Rac in rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) cells and mouse bone 
marrow-derived mast cells (BMMC) a TAT fusion toxin of Bordetella dermonecrotic 
toxin (DNT-TAT) was constructed. The fusion toxin activated Rac1 and RhoA in 
vitro but only Rac in RBL cells and BMMC. DNT-TAT caused an increase in inositol 
phosphate formation, calcium mobilization, ERK activation and degranulation of 
mast cells. All these effects were inhibited by the Rho GTPase-inactivating 
Clostridium difficile toxin B and Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin. Also the 
calcium ionophore A23187 caused mast cell activation, including ERK 
phosphorylation, by processes involving an activation of Rac. The data indicate 
pleiotropic functions of Rac in mast cell activation.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2010.03.007
PMID: 20211724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Jul 16;224(2):591-6. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1996.1069.

Effect of Clostridium difficile toxin B on IgE receptor-mediated signal 
transduction in rat basophilic leukemia cells: inhibition of phospholipase D 
activation.

Ojio K(1), Banno Y, Nakashima S, Kato N, Watanabe K, Lyerly DM, Miyata H, Nozawa 
Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Gifu University School of Medicine, Japan.

Antigen (Ag)-stimulated phospholipase D (PLD) activation and secretion were 
almost abolished by pretreatment of rat basophilic leukemia (RBL)-2H3 cells for 
4 h with 5 ng/ml Clostridium difficile Toxin B which is known to inhibit Rho 
family proteins (Rho, Cdc42, Rac). The concentration-dependent inhibition of PLD 
activation was well correlated with the level of glucosylation of Rho family 
proteins. In streptolysin O-permeabilized RBL cells, Toxin B suppressed [3H] 
phosphatidylbutanol (PBut) formation in response to guanosine 
5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) (GTP gamma S) and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate 
(PMA) by 67 and 43%, respectively. The synergistic PLD activation by GTP gamma S 
and PMA was also reduced by Toxin B by 67%. These results suggest that the IgE 
receptor-coupled PLD activation is largely mediated by Rho proteins.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1996.1069
PMID: 8702431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Toxicon. 1983;21(6):903-7. doi: 10.1016/0041-0101(83)90083-1.

Interaction of Clostridium difficile toxins and mouse hepatic microsomes.

Ehrich M.

Intraperitoneal administration of toxins of Clostridium difficile to mice 
resulted in loss of hepatic cytochrome P450 and peroxidation of microsomal 
lipids. Pretreatment with the microsomal enzyme inducer beta-naphthoflavone 
partially alleviated these effects and increased survival time of intoxicated 
animals.

DOI: 10.1016/0041-0101(83)90083-1
PMID: 6658814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Feb 1;91(3):947-51. doi: 10.1073/pnas.91.3.947.

CP-96,345, a substance P antagonist, inhibits rat intestinal responses to 
Clostridium difficile toxin A but not cholera toxin.

Pothoulakis C(1), Castagliuolo I, LaMont JT, Jaffer A, O'Keane JC, Snider RM, 
Leeman SE.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, University Hospital, Boston University School of 
Medicine, MA 02118.

Toxin A from Clostridium difficile mediates acute inflammatory enterocolitis in 
experimental animals, while cholera toxin causes noninflammatory secretory 
diarrhea. The purpose of this study was to investigate whether an antagonist to 
the peptide substance P, a constituent of primary sensory neurons known to 
participate in inflammatory responses, would inhibit toxin A-mediated enteritis 
in the rat ileum. Pretreatment of rats with CP-96,345 (2.5 mg per kg of body 
weight), a substance P antagonist, dramatically inhibited fluid secretion (P < 
0.01) and mannitol permeability (P < 0.01) in ileal loops exposed to toxin A. 
The protective effects, which were dose dependent, caused a significant 
reduction of inflammation in the lamina propria, reduction of the necrosis of 
intestinal epithelial cells, and complete inhibition of toxin A-mediated release 
of rat mast cell protease II, a specific product of rat mucosal mast cells. An 
inactive enantiomer of the substance P antagonist, CP-96,344, had no effect. In 
contrast, pretreatment with CP-96,345 had no inhibitory effect on the intestinal 
effects caused by administration of cholera toxin into the ileal loops. From 
these data, we conclude that the peptide substance P is involved in the 
secretory and inflammatory effects of toxin A but not of cholera toxin.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.91.3.947
PMCID: PMC521430
PMID: 7508124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1986 Dec;18(6):729-45. doi: 10.1093/jac/18.6.729.

Evaluation of aztreonam, cefoperazone, latamoxef and ceftazidime in the hamster 
colitis model.

Weinberg DS, Fernandes PB, Kao CC, Clark JM, Bonner DP, Sykes RB.

Aztreonam, ceftazidime, cefoperazone and latamoxef (moxalactam) were evaluated 
in a hamster model for antibiotic-associated colitis. Aztreonam, a novel 
monocyclic beta-lactam antibiotic specifically directed against aerobic 
Gram-negative bacteria with limited activity against Gram-positive and anaerobic 
bacteria did not cause haemorrhagic caecitis and death in hamsters when 
administered intraperitioneally or orally. Quantitative caecal cultures showed 
no changes in the anaerobic caecal microflora of hamsters treated 
intraperitoneally with aztreonam and only a temporary decrease in anaerobic 
Gram-negative bacilli in hamsters treated orally. Clostridium difficile and its 
cytotoxin were not present in these animals. Parenteral administration of 
ceftazidime also did not affect the anaerobic caecal microflora or cause 
caecitis. However, when given orally, ceftazidime suppressed the anaerobic 
caecal microflora and a lethal C. difficile-induced caecitis developed. 
Latamoxef or cefoperazone given parenterally resulted in caecitis and death in 
five days with marked changes in the anaerobic caecal microflora and C. 
difficile present in the caecal contents of these animals. The lethal 
haemorrhagic caecitis observed in this study was indistinguishable from that 
seen in the clindamycin-induced colitis model in the hamster. The possible 
correlation of these findings to gastrointestinal disturbances as a complication 
of antibiotic therapy in humans is discussed.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/18.6.729
PMID: 3546243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Dig Dis Sci. 1992 Jan;37(1):129-32. doi: 10.1007/BF01308355.

Effect of yogurt on clindamycin-induced Clostridium difficile colitis in 
hamsters.

Kotz CM(1), Peterson LR, Moody JA, Savaiano DA, Levitt MD.

Author information:
(1)Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota 
55417.

Yogurt exhibits in vitro bactericidal activity against a variety of pathogenic 
microorganisms, including Clostridium difficile. In the present studies, we 
tested whether yogurt ingestion could prevent or ameliorate antibiotic 
associated colitis in the clindamycin-treated hamster model. Male golden Syrian 
hamsters were given 5 mg/kg clindamycin subcutaneously 24 hr before and 6 hr 
following inoculation with 0.5 ml of less than 10, 10(3), 10(5), or 10(6) CFU/ml 
of C. difficile. Hamsters in the control group ingested chow and water ad 
libitum, whereas the experimental group ingested chow and a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of 
yogurt and water ad libitum, beginning 24 hr before the first injection of 
clindamycin and continuing throughout the course of the study. Animals were 
monitored for colonization with C. difficile, pathological evidence of colitis, 
and death. Mortality was 100% in yogurt-treated animals, and all animals showed 
histological changes of severe colitis. Fecal and intestinal segment cultures 
were positive for C. difficile in all animals. Thus, in the hamster model, we 
found no evidence to support the possible efficacy of yogurt in the prevention 
of C. difficile colitis.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01308355
PMID: 1728517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Lab Anim Sci. 1987 Oct;37(5):652-6.

An evaluation of ampicillin pharmacokinetics and toxicity in guinea pigs.

Young JD(1), Hurst WJ, White WJ, Lang CM.

Author information:
(1)Research Service, VA Medical Center, Sepulveda, CA 91343.

Erratum in
    Lab Anim Sci 1988 Jan;38(3):345.

Sodium ampicillin was administered subcutaneously to 350-550 g male Dunkin 
Hartley guinea pigs at doses of 6, 8 and 10 mg/kg tid for 5 days. Over a period 
of 12 days, the lowest ampicillin dose appeared to be tolerated well. However, 
significant body weight reduction and mortality occurred with the two higher 
dosage regimens. Cecal cultures of dead animals confirmed the presence of 
Clostridium difficile, an organism associated with antibiotic-induced 
enterotoxemia. Assay of serum collected from ampicillin-treated animals revealed 
ampicillin concentrations of approximately 10 micrograms/ml at 5 minutes 
post-dosing which fell precipitously to less than 0.2 micrograms/ml at 60 
minutes. Determination of biliary ampicillin levels during the 60 minutes after 
administration of a single 10 mg/kg SQ dose revealed concentrations ranging from 
18 micrograms/ml to 90 micrograms/ml. Estimates of total urinary ampicillin 
content after a single 10 mg/kg SQ dose were less than 500 micrograms/animal at 
7.5 minutes, but increased to greater than 2000 micrograms/animal at 60 minutes 
after dosing. Results of this study indicated that due to its short serum 
half-life, sodium ampicillin probably has little systemic therapeutic efficacy 
in guinea pigs. Because high concentrations of ampicillin accumulated in the 
urine and bile, the antibiotic probably would have therapeutic efficacy for 
urinary and intestinal infections. However, its associated toxicity at large 
doses probably precludes its use. In view of the rapid clearance of ampicillin 
in guinea pigs in comparison to other species, the pharmacokinetics of other 
antibiotics, especially those reported to be less toxic for guinea pigs, should 
be considered.

PMID: 3695404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Pathology. 1982 Jul;14(3):317-22. doi: 10.3109/00313028209061385.

Toxin-induced cell membrane injury in guinea pigs given lincomycin.

Lee SP, Thomsen LL.

Guinea pigs treated with lincomycin developed colitis, acute cholecystitis and 
abnormalities in red blood cell morphology. The present study was designed to 
study the production of clostridial toxins after lincomycin treatment. 
Lincomycin produced abnormalities in conventional but not in germ-free guinea 
pigs. Clostridium difficile was cultured from cecal contents of conventional 
guinea pigs treated with lincomycin. Cecal filtrate from sick guinea pigs was 
subjected to Sepharose 4B-CL and Sephadex G-200 column chromatography, yielding 
a partially purified toxin. Both cecal filtrate and partially purified toxin 
samples contained a heat labile substance which was cytotoxic to human lung 
fibroblast Wl-38 cells, and which was neutralized by Clostridium sordelli 
antitoxin. Toxin samples given orally or intraperitoneally killed normal guinea 
pigs. Finally, toxin samples induced red cell membrane changes in vitro as well 
as producing features of acute inflammation in healthy explants of guinea pig 
cecum and gallbladder in organ culture. Lincomycin treated guinea pigs produced 
Clostridium difficile toxin(s) which in turn caused diffuse cell membrane 
injury.

DOI: 10.3109/00313028209061385
PMID: 7133762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Med Microbiol. 2011 Aug;60(Pt 8):1101-1107. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.031054-0. Epub 
2011 Mar 24.

Use of different molecular typing methods for the study of heterogeneity within 
Clostridium difficile toxinotypes V and III.

Janezic S(1), Indra A(2), Allerberger F(2), Rupnik M(3)(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Public Health Maribor, Centre for Microbiology, Prvomajska 1, 
2000 Maribor, Slovenia.
(2)Austrian Agency for Health and Food Safety (AGES), Institute for Medical 
Microbiology and Hygiene, Waehringerstraße 25a, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Maribor, Slomskov trg 15, 2000 Maribor, 
Slovenia.

Clostridium difficile strains of toxinotypes III (n = 13) and V (n = 45) were 
typed by agarose gel-based PCR ribotyping, capillary gel electrophoresis-based 
PCR ribotyping and PFGE using two different restriction enzymes, SmaI and SacII. 
With conventional agarose gel-based PCR ribotyping, toxinotype III strains were 
distributed among six different PCR ribotypes and toxinotype V strains into 
three different PCR ribotypes. Capillary gel electrophoresis-based ribotyping 
was more discriminatory for toxinotype V strains, with six different ribotypes 
found. With PFGE using SmaI, all toxinotype III strains grouped together into a 
single pulsotype. Using SacII, ribotype 027 strains grouped together with >90 % 
similarity and were <83 % similar to other ribotypes of toxinotype III strains. 
Within ribotype 078, seven (SmaI) and eight (SacII) different pulsotypes were 
found, whilst ribotype 126 strains belonged to one (SmaI) and two (SacII) 
pulsotypes. Within ribotype 066, it was possible to distinguish between pig and 
human isolates. Using SacII, a further distinction could also be made between 
pig isolates from two different farms. PFGE (SmaI and SacII) clustered strains 
according to their toxinotype; however, correlation of PFGE and ribotyping was 
better with SacII. These data suggest that toxinotype III strains are a more 
heterogeneous group than toxinotype V strains and that SacII is more 
discriminatory than SmaI. Alternatively, the use of both enzymes simultaneously 
could improve PFGE typing of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.031054-0
PMID: 21436374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Contemp Top Lab Anim Sci. 2000 Jan;39(1):32-8.

Therapeutic efficacy of oral lactobacillus preparation for antibiotic-associated 
enteritis in guinea pigs.

Wasson K(1), Criley JM, Clabaugh MB, Koch MA, Peper RL.

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, 2001 
South Lincoln Ave., Urbana, IL 61802, USA.

Enteritis is a potential complication of antimicrobial agent use, particularly 
in certain species of rodents. The organism most frequently implicated in this 
disease is Clostridium difficile. Anecdotal information suggests that 
administration of yogurt or other Lactobacillus-containing products in 
conjunction with antimicrobial agents will prevent or minimize the effects of 
antibiotic-associated enteritis. We wanted to determine whether a single 
subcutaneous injection of clindamycin phosphate could induce enteritis in guinea 
pigs and whether a commercial Lactobacillus preparation would ameliorate the 
clinical effects of antibiotic administration in these animals. Juvenile male 
guinea pigs were divided into three treatment groups. Group 1 guinea pigs (n=8) 
received a single saline injection followed by an oral Lactobacillus preparation 
twice daily; group 2 (n=8) received a single antibiotic injection followed by an 
oral Lactobacillus preparation twice daily; group 3 (n=8) received a single 
antibiotic injection. Attitude, body temperature, body weight, and feed and 
water consumption were recorded for each guinea pig 7 days prior to and after 
treatment. Fecal samples were collected and necropsies performed on each guinea 
pig at the time of euthanasia. C. difficile and other enteric pathogens were not 
isolated from any group before or after treatment, although some guinea pigs 
receiving the antibiotic developed enteritis. There were no significant clinical 
differences between guinea pigs receiving antibiotics with the oral 
Lactobacillus preparation, and those receiving antibiotics alone. The results of 
this study suggest that a single injection of clindamycin phosphate can induce 
enteritis in guinea pigs and that oral administration of a 
Lactobacillus-containing product is ineffective in preventing clinical disease 
in guinea pigs administered clindamycin phosphate.

PMID: 11178313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Dig Dis Sci. 1996 Mar;41(3):614-20. doi: 10.1007/BF02282350.

Increased substance P receptor expression by blood vessels and lymphoid 
aggregates in Clostridium difficile-induced pseudomembranous colitis.

Mantyh CR(1), Maggio JE, Mantyh PW, Vigna SR, Pappas TN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 
27710, USA.

Pseudomembranous colitis is most often caused by toxins secreted by Clostridium 
difficile following bowel flora overgrowth after antibiotic use. The secretory 
and inflammatory effects observed in C. difficile toxin A-induced enterocolitis 
in the rat ileum are inhibited by CP-96,345, a substance P (SP) receptor 
antagonist. To determine if SP plays a role in the pathogenesis of human 
pseudomembranous colitis, SP receptor distribution was examined in a toxin 
A-positive specimen of bowel. Quantitative receptor autoradiography was used to 
examine SP receptors in tissue from a patient who tested positive for C. 
Difficile toxin. SP receptors were massively increased in small blood vessels 
and lymphoid aggregates in the pseudomembranous colitis bowel in comparison to 
control specimens. The SP binding was saturable and exhibited similar affinities 
for SP and CP-96,345. SP may contribute to the inflammatory response in 
pseudomembranous colitis via a massive increase in SP receptor antagonists may 
offer a novel therapeutic intervention for pseudomembranous colitis.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02282350
PMID: 8617145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2001 Aug;45(8):2340-7. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.45.8.2340-2347.2001.

GT160-246, a toxin binding polymer for treatment of Clostridium difficile 
colitis.

Kurtz CB(1), Cannon EP, Brezzani A, Pitruzzello M, Dinardo C, Rinard E, Acheson 
DW, Fitzpatrick R, Kelly P, Shackett K, Papoulis AT, Goddard PJ, Barker RH Jr, 
Palace GP, Klinger JD.

Author information:
(1)GelTex Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts 02451, USA. 
ckurtz@geltex.com

GT160-246, a high-molecular-weight soluble anionic polymer, was tested in vitro 
and in vivo for neutralization of Clostridium difficile toxin A and B 
activities. Five milligrams of GT160-246 per ml neutralized toxin-mediated 
inhibition of protein synthesis in Vero cells induced by 5 ng of toxin A per ml 
or 1.25 ng of toxin B per ml. In ligated rat ileal loops, 1 mg of GT160-246 
neutralized fluid accumulation caused by 5 microg of toxin A. At doses as high 
as 80 mg/loop, cholestyramine provided incomplete neutralization of fluid 
accumulation caused by 5 microg of toxin A. GT160-246 protected 80% of the 
hamsters from mortality caused by infection with C. difficile, whereas 
cholestyramine protected only 10% of animals. Treatment of C. difficile-infected 
hamsters with metronidazole initially protected 100% of the hamsters from 
mortality, but upon removal of treatment, 80% of the hamsters had relapses and 
died. In contrast, removal of GT160-246 treatment did not result in disease 
relapse in the hamsters. GT160-246 showed no antimicrobial activity in tests 
with a panel of 16 aerobic bacteria and yeast and 22 anaerobic bacteria and did 
not interfere with the in vitro activities of most antibiotics. GT160-246 offers 
a novel, nonantimicrobial treatment of C. difficile disease in humans.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.45.8.2340-2347.2001
PMCID: PMC90651
PMID: 11451694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Gastroenterology. 1984 Dec;87(6):1344-50.

Quantitative assay for acute intestinal inflammation based on myeloperoxidase 
activity. Assessment of inflammation in rat and hamster models.

Krawisz JE, Sharon P, Stenson WF.

An assay was devised to quantitate acute intestinal inflammation based on the 
assessment of myeloperoxidase activity. Myeloperoxidase is an enzyme found in 
neutrophils and, in much smaller quantities, in monocytes and macrophages. 
Myeloperoxidase was solubilized with hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide and 
myeloperoxidase activity was measured with a dianisidine-H2O2 assay. In 
neutrophil suspensions, myeloperoxidase activity was directly related to cell 
number down to as few as 500 cells. Myeloperoxidase activity was assayed in two 
animal models of inflammation: acetic acid-induced colitis in rats and 
Clostridium difficile enterotoxin-induced enteritis in hamsters. In both models, 
the activity of myeloperoxidase solubilized from the inflamed tissue was 
directly proportional to the number of neutrophils seen in histologic sections. 
Histologic evaluation of neutrophil accumulation was performed by counting the 
number of neutrophils in a histologic section 0.18 mm long and 5 micron thick. 
In both animal models, myeloperoxidase activity was linearly related to 
neutrophil number from 400 and 4000 cells/mm. Myeloperoxidase activity from 
chronically inflamed colon, in which both neutrophils and histiocytes were 
present, was directly related to neutrophil content. Histiocytes did not 
contribute significantly to myeloperoxidase activity. The determination of 
myeloperoxidase activity in the intestine is a simple biochemical assay that can 
be used to quantitate inflammation.

PMID: 6092199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Med Dosw Mikrobiol. 1992;44(1-2):49-54.

[Occurrence of Clostridium difficile in the digestive system of dogs].

[Article in Polish]

Martirossian G(1), Sokół-Leszczyńska B, Mierzejewski J, Meisel-Mikołajczyk F.

Author information:
(1)Zakład Bakteriologii i Immunologii Instytutu Biostruktury, Akademii 
Medycznej, Warszawie.

This study was aimed at seeking strains of Clostridium difficile in feces and 
investigation of influence of antibiotics application on frequency of isolation 
and detection of toxing in vivo produced by this microorganism. Samples of feces 
were obtained from experimental dogs consisting of two groups. To groups I 
belonged 150 healthy dogs. Group II consisted of samples of feces received from 
four dogs before and after application of various antibiotics. Clostridium 
difficile was not isolated from group I dogs. From dogs belonging to group II, 
28 strains were isolated. Production of toxing and classification to serological 
groups of the isolated strains were performed. Presence of this microorganism in 
feces of dogs is evident only after multiple application of antibiotics. Results 
of these studies suggest that dogs may constitute a reservoir of Clostridium 
difficile.

PMID: 1297034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Med Chem. 2015 Jun 25;58(12):5137-42. doi: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00366. Epub 
2015 Jun 3.

Structure-Activity Relationship Studies of a Series of Semisynthetic 
Lipopeptides Leading to the Discovery of Surotomycin, a Novel Cyclic Lipopeptide 
Being Developed for the Treatment of Clostridium difficile-Associated Diarrhea.

Yin N(1), Li J(1), He Y(1), Herradura P(1), Pearson A(1), Mesleh MF(1), Mascio 
CT(1), Howland K(1), Steenbergen J(1), Thorne GM(1), Citron D(2), Van Praagh 
AD(1), Mortin LI(1), Keith D(1), Silverman J(1), Metcalf C(1).

Author information:
(1)†Merck and Co., Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033, United States.
(2)‡R.M. Alden Research Lab, 6133 Bristol Parkway Ste 175, Culver City, 
California 90230, United States.

Novel cyclic lipopeptides with different acyl tails were synthesized via a 
semisynthetic approach. Structure-activity relationship studies revealed that 
lipophilicity, chain length, and the location of key aromatic functionalities of 
the tail modulated activity. The lead compound surotomycin exhibited 
significantly improved in vitro activity compared with daptomycin (MIC90 0.5 vs 
2 μg/mL) against Clostridium difficile including NAP1 epidemic strains. In 
hamster efficacy studies, surotomycin protected animals at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg, 
PO.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b00366
PMID: 25993059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Vet Pathol. 2006 Jan;43(1):2-14. doi: 10.1354/vp.43-1-2.

Progressive proliferative and dysplastic typhlocolitis in aging syrian hamsters 
naturally infected with Helicobacter spp.: a spontaneous model of inflammatory 
bowel disease.

Nambiar PR(1), Kirchain SM, Courmier K, Xu S, Taylor NS, Theve EJ, Patterson MM, 
Fox JG.

Author information:
(1)Prashant R Nambiar, Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Building 16-849, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. nambiar@mit.edu

Helicobacter spp. have been implicated in a variety of gastrointestinal tract 
diseases, including peptic ulcer disease, gastric cancer, and inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD), in humans and animals. Although most models of IBD are 
experimentally induced, spontaneous or natural models of IBD are rare. Herein, 
we describe a long-term study of chronic, progressive lesions that develop in 
the distal portion of the large bowel of unmanipulated Syrian hamsters naturally 
infected with Helicobacter spp. Twenty-four Syrian hamsters of three age groups 
(group A, 1 month [n = 4], group B, 7-12 months [n = 12], group C, 18-24 months 
[n = 12]), underwent complete postmortem examination. Results of microbial 
isolation and polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length 
polymorphism analyses confirmed the presence of Helicobacter spp. infection in 
the distal portion of the large bowel of all animals. Additionally, confounding 
pathogens, such as Clostridium difficile, Lawsonia intracellularis, and Giardia 
spp. that can cause proliferative enteritis, were absent in the hamsters of this 
study. Histopathologic scores for inflammation (P < 0.01), hyperplasia (P < 
0.01), and dysplasia (P < 0.05) were significantly higher in the ileocecocolic 
(ICC) junction of animals in group C, relative to group A. Dysplastic lesions of 
various grades were detected in 5 of 11 hamsters in group C. Interestingly, the 
segment of the bowel that is usually colonized by Helicobacter spp. in hamsters 
had the most severe lesions. One hamster of group C developed a malignant 
fibrous histiocytoma, whereas another hamster developed a round cell sarcoma 
originating from the ICC junction. Thus, lesions in the distal portion of the 
large bowel of aging hamsters naturally colonized with Helicobacter spp. 
warrants developing the hamster as an animal model of IBD and potentially 
IBD-related cancer.

DOI: 10.1354/vp.43-1-2
PMID: 16407482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 11;284(50):34666-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.051177. Epub 
2009 Oct 6.

Cwp84, a surface-associated cysteine protease, plays a role in the maturation of 
the surface layer of Clostridium difficile.

Kirby JM(1), Ahern H, Roberts AK, Kumar V, Freeman Z, Acharya KR, Shone CC.

Author information:
(1)Research Department, Health Protection Agency, Porton Down, Salisbury, 
Wiltshire SP4 0JG, UK.

Clostridium difficile is a major and growing problem as a hospital-associated 
infection that can cause severe, recurrent diarrhea. The mechanism by which the 
bacterium colonizes the gut during infection is poorly understood but 
undoubtedly involves protein components within the surface layer (S-layer), 
which play a role in adhesion. In C. difficile, the S-layer is composed of two 
principal components, the high and low molecular weight S-layer proteins, which 
are formed from the post-translational cleavage of a single precursor, SlpA. In 
the present study, we demonstrate that a recently characterized cysteine 
protease, Cwp84 plays a role in maturation of SlpA. Using a gene knock-out 
approach, we show that inactivation of the Cwp84 gene in C. difficile 
630DeltaErm results in a bacterial phenotype in which only immature, single 
chain SlpA comprises the S-layer. The Cwp84 knock-out mutants (CDDeltaCwp84) 
displayed significantly different colony morphology compared with the wild-type 
strain and grew more slowly in liquid medium. SlpA extracted from CDDeltaCwp84 
was readily cleaved into its mature subunits by trypsin treatment. Addition of 
trypsin to the growth medium also cleaved SlpA on CDDeltaCwp84 and increased the 
growth rate of the bacterium in a dose-dependent manner. Using the hamster model 
for C. difficile infection, CDDeltaCwp84 was found to be competent at causing 
disease with a similar pathology to the wild-type strain. The data show that 
whereas Cwp84 plays a role in the cleavage of SlpA, it is not an essential 
virulence factor and that bacteria expressing immature SlpA are able to cause 
disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.051177
PMCID: PMC2787329
PMID: 19808679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Infect Immun. 1998 May;66(5):1981-4. doi: 10.1128/IAI.66.5.1981-1984.1998.

Nonspecific binding of Clostridium difficile toxin A to murine immunoglobulins 
occurs via the fab component.

Cooke DL(1), Borriello SP.

Author information:
(1)Microbial Pathogenicity Research Group, Institute of Infections and Immunity 
Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

Clostridium difficile toxin A binds nonspecifically to a mouse monoclonal 
antibody (MAb) immunoglobulin G3 lambda chain [IgG3(lambda)], through the Fab 
component. This binding, which is retained even after boiling the MAb, is 
temperature dependent, with more toxin bound at 4 than 37 degrees C (P = 
0.0024). The nonspecific binding was decreased by incubation of the IgG3 lambda 
MAb with alpha- or beta-galactosidase (P = 0.0001 and 0.029, respectively), 
indicating that toxin A binds to a carbohydrate moiety on the Fab. However, 
binding was not blocked by the Bandeiraea simplicifolia lectin BS-1, indicating 
that a terminal alpha-galactose may not be involved. Binding was also not 
affected by competitive assays with Lewis X antigen. The dependence on 
carbohydrate moieties in nonspecific binding was also shown for two other MAbs, 
IgA(kappa) and IgM(lambda), with demonstration of a significant reduction in 
binding with alpha-galactosidase (P = 0.0001 and 0.0002, respectively) but not 
beta-galactosidase (P = 0.27 and 0.25, respectively).

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.66.5.1981-1984.1998
PMCID: PMC108153
PMID: 9573079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Microbiol Immunol. 1988;32(6):551-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1988.tb01417.x.

Purification and some properties of cytotoxin produced by Clostridium difficile.

Katoh T(1), Honda T, Miwatani T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Serology, Osaka University.

The cytotoxin produced by Clostridium difficile was highly purified by using 
ammonium sulfate fractionation and successive column chromatographies of 
DEAE-Sephadex A-25, hydroxyapatite, Bio-Gel A-0.5m, Phenyl-Sepharose CL-4B, and 
Mono Q. The purified cytotoxin gave a single band on conventional and sodium 
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of 
dithiothreitol. Its molecular weight was estimated to be 260,000 and 50,000 by 
gel filtration and sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide slab gel 
electrophoresis in the presence of dithiothreitol, respectively. Thus it was 
supposed that the toxin consists of 5 subunits having molecular weight of 
approximately 50,000. It had an isoelectric point of 6.6. The toxin was 
heat-labile (60 C for 10 min) and inactivated by treatment with trypsin and 
pronase, or at pH below 4 or over 10. The minimum cytotoxic dose of the 
cytotoxin against Chinese hamster ovary cells was 3 ng. It was also demonstrated 
that the toxin is antigenically different from enterotoxin of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1988.tb01417.x
PMID: 3173147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1991 Jan 10;1091(1):51-4. doi: 
10.1016/0167-4889(91)90221-i.

ADP-ribosylation in Clostridium difficile toxin-treated cells is not related to 
cytopathogenicity of toxin B.

Florin I(1), Thelestam M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

ADP-ribosylation of a protein in human fibroblasts treated with partially 
purified Clostridium difficile toxin B was previously reported. Here we show 
that the same protein was ADP-ribosylated also in human fibroblasts exposed to 
supernatant from a C. difficile strain producing neither toxin A nor toxin B. 
Furthermore, in Chinese hamster ovary and in Vero cells, showing toxin B-induced 
cytopathogenic effect, the protein was not significantly ADP-ribosylated. The 
results indicate that the ADP-ribosylation is unrelated to the cytopathogenic 
effect of toxin B. It appears to be caused by another unidentified factor from 
C. difficile, and the substrate may correspond to a protein modified 
endogenously in cells exposed to stressful situations. Cellular actin was not 
ADP-ribosylated by toxin B.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4889(91)90221-i
PMID: 1995067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1989 Oct 5;998(2):151-7. doi: 
10.1016/0167-4838(89)90267-7.

Production, purification and characterization of Clostridium difficile toxic 
proteins different from toxin A and from toxin B.

Torres JF(1), Lönnroth I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Gothenburgh University, Göteborg Sweden.

The purification and characterization of three new proteins called C1, C2, and 
C3 from Clostridium difficile are described. Their estimated molecular mass were 
about 350 (C1), 270 (C2) and 140 (C3) kDa, consisting of subunits of 39 (C1), 43 
(C2) and 41 (C3) kDa, respectively. Immunodiffusion revealed that the three 
proteins contained similar but not identical antigenic determinants to toxin A. 
Each protein induced a cytotonic effect on hamster ovaric cells; the combined 
proteins, had a specific activity on cells 5-times higher than that of toxin A. 
In rat intestinal loops, they induced a clear fluid secretion, while toxin A 
elicited a haemorrhagic fluid response. The cytotonic activities of all three 
proteins were abolished by antiserum against toxin A, while antiserum against 
toxin B inhibited only the activity of the 270 kDa protein. In contrast to toxin 
A, the cytotoxicity of the three proteins was inactivated by trypsin. Thus, the 
chemical, antigenic and biological properties of these proteins differed from 
those of toxin A and toxin B.

DOI: 10.1016/0167-4838(89)90267-7
PMID: 2506935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Dev Biol. 2003 Aug 15;260(2):522-35. doi: 10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00273-2.

Involvement of Rho family G protein in the cell signaling for sperm 
incorporation during fertilization of mouse eggs: inhibition by Clostridium 
difficile toxin B.

Kumakiri J(1), Oda S, Kinoshita K, Miyazaki S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Tokyo Women's Medical University School of 
Medicine, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8666, Japan.

Sperm-egg interaction was investigated in mouse eggs freed from the zona 
pellucida and injected with Clostridium difficile toxin B, the inhibitor of Rho 
family small G proteins. Toxin B reduced in a dose-dependent manner the 
percentage of eggs associated with sperm fusion on the surface or sperm nucleus 
decondensation in the ooplasm, examined by injection of a DNA-staining dye into 
the egg and transfer of the dye to the fused sperm head after recording 
intracellular Ca(2+) responses for 100 min postinsemination. The mean number of 
decondensed sperm nuclei per egg was remarkably decreased by approximately 1 
microg/ml toxin B in the ooplasm. This was because spermatozoa were arrested at 
the fusion state without developing to sperm incorporation and tended to lose 
cytoplasmic continuity to the egg. The fusion-arrested spermatozoa caused 
transient small Ca(2+) oscillations in most of eggs, while an injected 
spermatozoon produced repetitive large Ca(2+) spikes unaffected by toxin B. A 
decrease in the rate of fused spermatozoa and decondensed sperm nuclei was also 
caused by 20-40 microM cytochalasin D, the inhibitor of actin polymerization. 
Immunostaining of Rho proteins showed that Rac1 and RhoB are present in the 
cortical ooplasm, but Cdc42 is absent. Actin filaments in the cortex appeared to 
be reduced in toxin B-injected eggs. This study suggests that Rho protein(s) 
regulating actin-based cytoskeletal reorganization is involved in the process 
leading to sperm incorporation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00273-2
PMID: 12921750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Infect Dis. 2002 Dec 15;186(12):1781-9. doi: 10.1086/345676. Epub 2002 Nov 22.

Colonization for the prevention of Clostridium difficile disease in hamsters.

Sambol SP(1), Merrigan MM, Tang JK, Johnson S, Gerding DN.

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease Section, Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Chicago 
Health Care System, Lakeside Division, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Studies suggest that asymptomatic colonization with Clostridium difficile (CD) 
decreases the risk of CD-associated disease (CDAD) in humans. A hamster model 
was used to test the efficacy of colonization with 3 nontoxigenic CD strains for 
preventing CDAD after exposure to toxigenic CD. Groups of 10 hamsters were given 
10(6) nontoxigenic CD spores 2 days after receiving a single dose of 
clindamycin. Five days later, the hamsters were given 100 spores of 1 of 3 
toxigenic CD strains previously shown to cause mortality within 48 h. Each 
nontoxigenic strain prevented disease in 87%-97% of hamsters that were 
challenged with toxigenic strains. Failure to prevent CDAD was associated with 
failure of colonization with nontoxigenic CD. Colonization with nontoxigenic CD 
strains is highly effective in preventing CDAD in hamsters challenged with 
toxigenic CD strains, which suggests that use of a probiotic strategy for CDAD 
prevention in humans receiving antibiotics might be beneficial.

DOI: 10.1086/345676
PMID: 12447764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Clin Microbiol. 1983 Oct;18(4):1006-7. doi: 10.1128/JCM.18.4.1006-1007.1983.

Concomitance of cytotoxigenic and non-cytotoxigenic Clostridium difficile in 
stool specimens.

Borriello SP, Honour P.

Six patients with antibiotic-associated diarrhea and one patient with diarrhea 
unrelated to antibiotic use yielded both cytotoxigenic and non-cytotoxigenic 
isolates of Clostridium difficile from the same stool specimens. In addition, 
these isolates were shown to be pathogenic and nonpathogenic, respectively, in 
the hamster model of antibiotic-associated colitis. These data imply that more 
than one toxin type of C. difficile may be harbored simultaneously. If toxin 
testing is used to identify C. difficile, more than one colony must be tested.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.18.4.1006-1007.1983
PMCID: PMC270955
PMID: 6630455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Scand J Infect Dis Suppl. 1980;(Suppl 22):16-29.

Interaction of cytopathogenic toxin from Clostridium difficile with cells in 
tissue culture.

Thelestam M, Brönnegård M.

Partially purified cytopathogenic toxin from Clostridium difficile induced 
morphological changes in five cell lines in tissue culture. The relative 
sensitivity scale of the cell lines was human lung and intestinal fibroblasts 
greater than Chinese hamster ovary cells much greater than mouse adrenal cells 
greater than mouse neuroblastoma cells. The cytopathogenic effect did not occur 
in toxin-treated lung fibroblasts incubated at 0 degree C. Pre-incubation of 
lung fibroblasts with 2,4-dinitrophenol prevented the cytopathogenic effect. The 
toxin bound to as yet unidentified receptors at the surface of human lung and 
intestinal fibroblasts. The toxin-induced morphological (actinomorphic) changes 
in lung and intestinal fibroblasts closely resembled the effects induced by the 
fungal metabolite cytochalasin B (CB), which is known to disrupt microfilaments 
reversibly. Indirect immunofluorescence with anti-actin antiserum demonstrated 
that the C. difficile toxin disrupted the straight actin filament bundles seen 
in normal fibroblasts. The cytopathogenic effect became apparent 3--5 h after 
exposure to toxin. However, irreversible intoxication occurred already within 20 
min of exposure, as toxin-treated fibroblasts which were trypsinized and 
reseeded were not able to attach to the solid substratum and regenerate their 
typical shape, a process requiring reorganization of actin into microfilament 
bundles. Two possible different modes of action of the toxin, leading to 
microfilament disruption, are suggested: 1) Transmembrane signal by 
surface-bound toxin via microfilament-linked integral membrane protein(s) and 2) 
Penetration of surface-bound whole toxin or an active fragment, followed by its 
intracellular action. The experimental evidence so far is consistent with either 
of these mechanisms.

PMID: 7010532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Clin Microbiol. 1987 Oct;25(10):1999-2000. doi: 
10.1128/JCM.25.10.1999-2000.1987.

Detection of Clostridium difficile toxin in various tissue culture monolayers.

Maniar AC(1), Williams TW, Hammond GW.

Author information:
(1)Cadham Provincial Laboratory, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Thirty stool filtrates known to contain Clostridium difficile toxin based on 
previous testing on McCoy cells were tested for toxicity on primary African 
green monkey kidney (AGMK), McCoy, MRC-5, primary rhesus monkey kidney (RMK), 
and Vero cells. All 30 filtrates showed cytotoxic effect at greater than or 
equal to 1:100 dilution on McCoy and Vero cells. A total of 22 filtrates were 
positive on MRC-5 monolayers, while only 16 and 10 filtrates showed positive 
cytotoxic effect on AGMK and RMK cells, respectively. Another 630 stool 
specimens were tested on McCoy and Vero cells only. Of these stool filtrates, 70 
were positive and 560 were negative with both cell lines, which thus gave 100% 
agreement. Vero cells can be used interchangeably with McCoy cells for the 
detection of C. difficile toxin in stool filtrates.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.25.10.1999-2000.1987
PMCID: PMC269385
PMID: 3667920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Gastroenterology. 1979 Feb;76(2):351-5.

Prevention of clindamycin-induced colitis in hamsters by Clostridium sordellii 
antitoxin.

Allo M, Silva J Jr, Fekety R, Rifkin GD, Waskin H.

Toxins produced by Clostridium difficile have been implicated in the etiology of 
antibiotic-induced colitis. Clostridium difficile antitoxin is not available, 
but recent studies have shown that toxins present in the feces of patients with 
this disease are neutralized by Clostridium sordellii antitoxin. We found that 
C. sordellii antitoxin neutralized toxins produced in broth cultures of either 
C. sordellii or C. difficile and that passive immunization with C. sordellii 
antitoxin before challenge with clindamycin prevented colitis in hamsters. 
Significantly fewer antitoxin-treated animals than unimmunized controls 
developed diarrhea and died with hemorrhagic colitis. Administration of 300 U of 
antitoxin parenterally either on the day of challenge with clindamycin or 24 hr 
later provided significant protection (25% mortality vs. 100% mortality in 
controls, P less than 0.01). None of eight animals given antitoxin (300 U) both 
on the day of challenge and 24 hr later died. Filtrates prepared from cecal 
contents of dead or killed hamsters were tested for toxicity by intraperitoneal 
injection into hamsters and by addition to monolayers of monkey kidney cells. 
Fecal filtrates from antitoxin-protected animals were not toxic in these assays, 
but filtrates from control animals were uniformly toxic. Passive immunization 
against clostridial toxins was protective against clindamycin-associated colitis 
in this model. This finding further substantiates the importance of these toxins 
in the pathogenesis of antibiotic-induced colitis.

PMID: 759263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 6;276(14):10670-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M009445200. Epub 2001 
Jan 4.

Low pH-induced formation of ion channels by clostridium difficile toxin B in 
target cells.

Barth H(1), Pfeifer G, Hofmann F, Maier E, Benz R, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie der 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Clostridium difficile toxin B (269 kDa), which is one of the causative agents of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis, inactivates Rho 
GTPases by glucosylation. Here we studied the uptake and membrane interaction of 
the toxin with eukaryotic target cells. Bafilomycin A1, which prevents 
acidification of endosomal compartments, blocked the cellular uptake of toxin B 
in Chinese hamster ovary cells cells. Extracellular acidification (pH </= 5.2) 
induced uptake of toxin B into the cytosol even in the presence of bafilomycin 
A1. Toxin B increased (86)Rb(+) release when preloaded Chinese hamster ovary 
cells were exposed to low pH (pH </= 5.6) for 5 min. Release of (86)Rb(+) 
depended on the concentration of toxin B and on the pH of the extracellular 
medium. An antibody directed against the holotoxin prevented channel formation, 
whereas an antibody against the N-terminal enzyme domain was without effect. The 
N-terminally truncated toxin B fragment consisting of amino acids 547-2366 
increased (86)Rb(+) efflux when cells were exposed to low pH. Toxin B also 
induced pH-dependent channel formation in artificial lipid bilayer membranes. 
Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin, another member of the family of large 
clostridial cytotoxins, also induced increased (86)Rb(+) release at low pH. The 
results suggest that large clostridial cytotoxins including C. difficile toxin B 
and C. sordellii lethal toxin undergo structural changes at low pH of endosomes 
that are accompanied by membrane insertion and channel formation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M009445200
PMID: 11152463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Infect Immun. 1978 May;20(2):526-9. doi: 10.1128/IAI.20.2.526-529.1978.

Clindamycin-induced enterocolitis in hamsters as a model of pseudomembranous 
colitis in patients.

Chang TW, Bartlett JG, Gorbach SL, Onderdonk AB.

Stools from a patient with antibiotic-associated colitis and cecal contents from 
a hamster with clindamycin-induced enterocolitis were compared in a cytotoxicity 
assay to determine common properties. Both specimens produced actinomorphic 
changes in human amnion cells at 10(-7) dilutions. The toxin was acid labile, 
heat labile, nonether extractable, non-dialyzable, and produced maximum activity 
at 60% with ammonium sulfate precipitation. Cytotoxicity was neutralized with 
clostridial antitoxin but not with equine serum. Clostridium difficile was 
recovered in high concentrations in specimens from both the hamster and 
patients. The supernatants of these C. difficile strains produced cytoxic 
effects which were also neutralized by clostridial antitoxins. These results 
indicate that clindamycin-induced enterocolitis in hamsters is a model of human 
disease and implicate toxin-producing clostridia as responsible agents.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.20.2.526-529.1978
PMCID: PMC421886
PMID: 669810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Clin Invest. 1996 Aug 1;98(3):641-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI118835.

Rabbit sucrase-isomaltase contains a functional intestinal receptor for 
Clostridium difficile toxin A.

Pothoulakis C(1), Gilbert RJ, Cladaras C, Castagliuolo I, Semenza G, Hitti Y, 
Montcrief JS, Linevsky J, Kelly CP, Nikulasson S, Desai HP, Wilkins TD, LaMont 
JT.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Massachusetts, USA.

The intestinal effects of Clostridium difficile toxin A are inidated by toxin 
binding to luminal enterocyte receptors. We reported previously that the rabbit 
ileal brush border (BB) receptor is a glycoprotein with an alpha-d-galactose 
containing trisaccharide in the toxin-binding domain (1991. J. Clin. Invest. 
88:119-125). In this study we characterized the rabbit ileal BB receptor for 
this toxin. Purified toxin receptor peptides of 19 and 24 amino acids showed 
100% homology with rabbit sucrase-isomaltase (SI). Guinea pig receptor antiserum 
reacted in Western blots with rabbit SI and with the purified toxin receptor. 
Antireceptor IgG blocked in vitro binding of toxin A to rabbit ileal villus cell 
BB. Furthermore, anti-SI IgG inhibited toxin A-induced secretion (by 78.1%, P < 
0.01), intestinal permeability (by 80.8%, P < 0.01), and histologic injury (P < 
0.01) in rabbit ileal loops in vivo. Chinese hamster ovary cells transfected 
with SI cDNA showed increased intracellular calcium increase in response to 
native toxin (holotoxin) or to a recombinant 873-amino acid peptide representing 
the receptor binding domain of toxin A. These data suggest that toxin A binds 
specifically to carbohydrate domains on rabbit ileal SI, and that such binding 
is relevant to signal transduction mechanisms that mediate in vitro and in vivo 
toxicity.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118835
PMCID: PMC507473
PMID: 8698855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Gastroenterol Clin Biol. 1991;15(1):22-7.

[Response of the IRD intestinal epithelial cell line to Clostridium difficile 
toxins A and B in rats. Effect of Saccharomyces boulardii].

[Article in French]

Czerucka D(1), Nano JL, Bernasconi P, Rampal P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Gastroentérologie et Nutrition, Faculté de Médecine, Nice.

In vivo, Clostridium difficile acts by releasing 2 toxins: toxin A, an 
enterotoxin, and toxin B, a cytotoxin. This study was performed to determine: a) 
whether the rat epithelial intestinal cell line IRD 98 responds to Clostridium 
difficile toxin A and B; b) whether the yeast Saccharomyces boulardii has an 
effect on this model. Evaluation of 3H-thymidine incorporation into IRD 98 cells 
exposed to toxin B revealed that DNA synthesis was inhibited for low 
concentrations (10 ng/ml). For higher concentrations, DNA synthesis was not 
modified. Evaluation of 14C-leucine incorporation into IRD 98 cells exposed to 
toxin B revealed that this toxin affected protein synthesis. Whereas cholera 
toxin stimulates adenylate cyclase in IRD 98 cells, cAMP levels in cells exposed 
to various quantities of toxin A was similar to that in control cells. As 
opposed to cholera toxin, which does not affect the cytoskeletal structure of 
IRD 98 cells, 7 micrograms/ml of toxin A and even smaller amounts of toxin B (1 
ng/ml) were found to cause structural alterations by immunofluorescence studies. 
Prior exposition of cells to Saccharomyces boulardii reduced or prevented the 
rounding of cells in the presence of these toxins. IRD 98 cells can thus be 
considered a good model for in vitro investigation of the effects of Clostridium 
difficile toxins A and B, and findings suggest that Saccharomyces boulardii has 
a protective effect against the action of these toxins.

PMID: 1849105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1985 Jun;27(6):980-1. doi: 10.1128/aac.27.6.980.

Studies with temocillin in a hamster model of antibiotic-associated colitis.

Boon RJ, Beale AS.

Hamsters given the new penicillin temocillin, either orally or by injection, did 
not develop antibiotic-associated colitis, whereas animals given the control 
antibiotics cefoxitin or clindamycin developed the disease, which is 
characterized by marked hemorrhagic cecitis and high cecal levels of Clostridium 
difficile cytotoxin.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.27.6.980
PMCID: PMC180203
PMID: 3875312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1990 Jul;34(7):1348-53. doi: 10.1128/aac.34.7.1348.

Quantitative study of antibiotic-induced susceptibility to Clostridium difficile 
enterocecitis in hamsters.

Larson HE(1), Borriello SP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Communicable Diseases, Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, 
Middlesex, England.

Commonly used antibiotics were compared for their ability to induce Clostridium 
difficile enterocecitis and death in hamsters. Susceptibility to infection with 
C. difficile was measured by calculating 50% lethal doses (in CFU) for hamsters 
for various intervals after antibiotic treatment. Infection occurred after very 
small doses of C. difficile were given to hamsters treated with clindamycin, 
ampicillin, flucloxacillin, and cefuroxime; there was little difference between 
the antibiotics in the degree of susceptibility that they induced. A large 
difference in the duration of susceptibility was observed, however, with 
susceptibility being temporary following ampicillin, flucloxacillin, and 
cefuroxime administration but long-lived following clindamycin administration. A 
larger dose of ampicillin, multiple doses of ampicillin, and a combination of 
antibiotics had comparatively small effects on the duration of susceptibility. 
C. difficile growth and toxin production in in vitro suspensions of cecal 
contents were found to correlate closely with in vivo hamster infectivity. A 
persisting loss of colonization resistance following antibiotic treatment may be 
a type of postantibiotic effect. Although these results cannot be applied 
directly to humans, they suggest lines of further investigation into how 
antibiotics may differ in producing risks of C. difficile infection and 
pseudomembranous colitis in patients.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.34.7.1348
PMCID: PMC175979
PMID: 2386366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Infect Immun. 1987 Jan;55(1):198-200. doi: 10.1128/IAI.55.1.198-200.1987.

Prairie dog model for antimicrobial agent-induced Clostridium difficile 
diarrhea.

Muller EL, Pitt HA, George WL.

We have noted that prairie dogs given cefoxitin develop diarrhea and lose weight 
yet survive for periods of up to 4 weeks. Therefore, we tested the hypothesis 
that cefoxitin causes Clostridium difficile cecitis in prairie dogs. Six prairie 
dogs were given a single intramuscular dose of 100 mg of cefoxitin per kg of 
body weight, and six control animals received saline; both groups were 
sacrificed 1 week later. Controls had no diarrhea and lost 2% of their body 
weight, whereas cefoxitin-treated animals had diarrhea (P less than 0.001) and 
lost 16% of their body weight (P less than 0.001); one animals died 6 days after 
cefoxitin challenge. None of the controls yielded C. difficile or had cecal 
cytotoxin or pseudomembranes detected. Cecal contents from all cefoxitin-treated 
animals, however, yielded C. difficile (P less than 0.01) and had cecal 
cytotoxin present (P less than 0.01). Four of five surviving animals also had 
cecal pseudomembranes present (P less than 0.01). These results demonstrate that 
in prairie dogs cefoxitin induces C. difficile cecitis. We conclude that the 
prairie dog is another model for the study of antibiotic-induced diarrhea. The 
disease in prairie dogs may have a more chronic course than in other animal 
models of C. difficile-induced diarrhea and may be useful as a model for 
studying certain aspects of C. difficile-induced diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.55.1.198-200.1987
PMCID: PMC260301
PMID: 3793229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Med Microbiol. 1992 May;36(5):307-11. doi: 10.1099/00222615-36-5-307.

Proteolytic activity of Clostridium difficile.

Seddon SV(1), Borriello SP.

Author information:
(1)Microbial Pathogenicity Research Group, MRC Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, 
Middlesex.

Ten isolates of Clostridium difficile expressing different degrees of 
toxigenicity and virulence in an animal model were assayed for the production of 
proteolytic enzymes by various methods. All strains demonstrated some activity 
in one or more of the assay systems. There was no direct correlation between 
toxigenic status and enzyme production. However, those strains known to be 
highly virulent in a hamster model were the most proteolytic. The most commonly 
detected enzyme was cell associated, and its substrate specificity suggested it 
was a trypsin-like enzyme. Initial purification of the enzyme from strain VPI 
10463 gave a 10% yield with a 14-fold increase in purity. Inhibition studies on 
this preparation indicated that the enzyme was a thiol protease. The enzyme has 
pH and temperature optima of 7.5 and 37 degrees C, respectively. These 
characteristics suggest that the enzyme is more related to clostripain, the 
thiol clostridio-peptidase of C. histolyticum, than to trypsin. Whilst the role 
of this enzyme remains unclear, it is possible that it may be a contributory 
factor in the virulence of the organism as described for other clostridial 
infections.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-36-5-307
PMID: 1588579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Can J Microbiol. 1986 Feb;32(2):132-6.

[Transfer of the cecal flora of the hamster to the germfree C3H mouse: use of 
this model to study the flora of the anti-Clostridium difficile barrier].

[Article in French]

Su WJ, Bourlioux P, Bournaud M, Besnier MO, Fourniat J.

The purpose of this work was the research and development of an experimental 
model to study anti-Clostridium difficile caecal microflora in the hamster. 
First the existence of this "barrier" was verified in conventional hamsters. 
Then, the caecal flora from these animals was orally transferred to C3H germfree 
mice. The barrier effect was maintained in the axenic mice. The comparative 
bacteriological analysis of hamster and mouse feces did not reveal important 
variations in the dominant anaerobic flora (P less than 0.01). After treatment 
with erythromycin, the barrier effect was maintained and while the disappearance 
of Escherichia coli was observed, the dominant anaerobic flora persisted. After 
dilution (10(-2] and subsequent heating (70 degrees C, 10 min) of caecal 
contents, the inhibitory activity against C. difficile was maintained although 
the number of aerobic and aerotolerant bacteria was reduced. The isolation from 
caecal microflora of anaerobic strains implicated in the resistance to 
colonization is presently underway in Freter anaerobic chambers.

PMID: 3516351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Med Microbiol. 1990 Oct;33(2):85-90. doi: 10.1099/00222615-33-2-85.

Virulence of ten serogroups of Clostridium difficile in hamsters.

Delmée M(1), Avesani V.

Author information:
(1)University of Louvain, Microbiology Unit, Brussels, Belgium.

A slide agglutination technique identifying 10 serogroups of Clostridium 
difficile (A,B,C,D,F,G,H,I,K and X) has been described previously. In this 
study, we have used the hamster to compare the ability of the 10 serogroup 
reference strains to colonise and produce disease. Groups of four hamsters were 
each given a single intraperitoneal injection of either clindamycin or 
cefoxitin, and an oral challenge dose of C. difficile. The time taken to 
establish faecal colonisation and the length of survival after colonisation were 
monitored. All hamsters treated with cefoxitin became colonised by day 3 and 
those challenged with the cytotoxigenic strains of serogroups A,C,H and K 
developed colitis and died. Among those challenged with the non-toxigenic 
strains of groups B,D,I and X and the toxigenic strains of groups F and G, 
faecal colonisation was established without signs of disease. This demonstrates 
that there are differences in virulence even among toxigenic strains of C. 
difficile. The same phenomenon was observed after treatment with clindamycin but 
the pattern of colonisation was quite different with some strains. In the 
hamsters challenged with toxigenic strains of groups C and K and non-toxigenic 
strains of groups D and I, which are highly resistant to clindamycin, the 
response was the same as with cefoxitin. The results were different with strains 
which were susceptible to clindamycin. Some animals became colonised much later 
than those treated with cefoxitin but the mortality was similar.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-33-2-85
PMID: 2231680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Microb Pathog. 1987 Jun;2(6):455-63. doi: 10.1016/0882-4010(87)90052-0.

Cellular internalisation of Clostridium difficile toxin A.

Henriques B(1), Florin I, Thelestam M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

The cytopathogenic effect of toxin A from Clostridium difficile was studied in 
cultured human lung fibroblasts. The final effect was dependent on toxin 
concentration and exposure time. Binding of the toxin to cells occurred at 0 
degrees C as well as at 37 degrees C. The latency before appearance of the 
cytopathogenic effect was dose-dependent with a minimum of 45 min. The 
appearance of a cytopathogenic effect in toxin-treated cells was prevented by 
the addition of trypsin, antitoxin, lysosomotropic agents, inhibitors of the 
energy metabolism, 200 mM KCl, 20 mM benzyl alcohol and by incubation at 18 
degrees C. Several inhibitors of lysosomal proteases did not prevent the 
appearance of the cytopathogenic effect. When the extracellular pH was lowered 
to 4.5 for 5 min immediately after toxin binding the period of latency was 
significantly shortened. Likewise, the protective effects of lysosomotropic 
agents were abolished by lowering the extracellular pH. Chinese hamster ovary 
cell mutants, defective in acidification of their endosomes, were less sensitive 
to toxin A than wildtype cells. The results indicate that cellular 
internalisation of toxin A is necessary for intoxication. Moreover, we postulate 
that the toxin needs some sort of enzymatic activation which can take place only 
after exposure of the toxin to a low pH.

DOI: 10.1016/0882-4010(87)90052-0
PMID: 3148814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Infect Dis. 2003 Dec 15;188(12):1922-7. doi: 10.1086/379836. Epub 2003 Dec 9.

Prevention of fatal Clostridium difficile-associated disease during continuous 
administration of clindamycin in hamsters.

Merrigan MM(1), Sambol SP, Johnson S, Gerding DN.

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease Section, Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Chicago 
Health Care System, Lakeside Division, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Clostridium difficile-associated disease (CDAD) due to toxigenic strains is 
prevented in hamsters by colonization by nontoxigenic C. difficile after 
administration of clindamycin (Cm). To prevent CDAD during treatment with 
antibiotics, we gave a Cm-resistant nontoxigenic C. difficile strain, M13 
(minimal inhibitory concentration [MIC], >256 microg/mL), and a Cm-susceptible 
strain, M3 (MIC, 0.5 microg/mL), to hamsters receiving Cm daily for days 1-5. 
Either M13 or M3 was given orogastrically (1 x 10(6) spores/day) to each hamster 
in 3 groups of 5 each, on either day 3, days 3-5, or days 3-7. M13 colonized at 
a higher rate and faster than did M3 (P<.001). When hamsters were challenged by 
toxigenic strain B1 on days 5, 7, or 9, M13 prevented CDAD in 100% of the 
hamsters. M3 protected no hamsters challenged by B1 on day 5, 20% on day 7, and 
100% on day 9. M13 contains the erm(B) resistance gene but not the mobilizable 
element Tn5398. The benefits of use of Cm-resistant nontoxigenic C. difficile to 
prevent CDAD must be balanced against the risk that resistance might be 
transferred to other enteric bacteria.

DOI: 10.1086/379836
PMID: 14673773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Zentralbl Bakteriol Mikrobiol Hyg A. 1986 Feb;261(1):29-42. doi: 
10.1016/s0176-6724(86)80060-8.

Detection of Clostridium difficile Toxin A by immunoblotting.

Rautenberg P, Stender F, Ullmann U.

A clinical isolate of Clostridium difficile has been tested for its toxin 
production. Both toxins, toxin A and toxin B, could be detected by tissue 
culture and in animal models as well. Antibodies against a crude toxin A 
preparation have been prepared. These antibodies are able to neutralize the 
toxin both in the mouse lethality test and tissue culture test systems. The 
specificity of this antiserum has been analysed by electroimmunoprecipitation 
methods. Using immunoblotting, it could be demonstrated that the antigenicity of 
toxin A after SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under denaturing and 
reducing conditions was still preserved. The molecular weight of toxin A has 
been estimated to be 250000. Immunoblotting offers a simple and reliable 
procedure for toxin A detection from culture supernatants of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1016/s0176-6724(86)80060-8
PMID: 3518293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Biol Chem. 1994 Apr 8;269(14):10706-12.

Clostridium difficile toxin B acts on the GTP-binding protein Rho.

Just I(1), Fritz G, Aktories K, Giry M, Popoff MR, Boquet P, Hegenbarth S, von 
Eichel-Streiber C.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universität des Saarlandes, 
Homburg-Saar, Germany.

Clostridium difficile toxin B exhibits cytotoxic activity that is characterized 
by the disruption of the microfilamental cytoskeleton. Here we studied whether 
the GTP-binding Rho protein, which reportedly participates in the regulation of 
the actin cytoskeleton, is involved in the toxin action. Toxin B treatment of 
Chinese hamster ovary cells reveals a time- and concentration-dependent decrease 
in the ADP-ribosylation of Rho by Clostridium botulinum C3 exoenzyme in the cell 
lysate. Disruption of the microfilament system induced by C. botulinum C2 toxin 
or cytochalasin D does not cause impaired ADP-ribosylation of Rho. Toxin B 
exhibits its effects on Rho not only in intact cells but also when added to cell 
lysates. Besides endogenous Rho, RhoA-glutathione S-transferase (Rho-GST) fusion 
protein added to cell lysate showed decreased ADP-ribosylation after toxin B 
treatment. Immunoblot analysis reveals identical amounts of Rho-GST and no 
change in molecular mass after toxin B treatment compared with controls. 
ADP-ribosylation of Rho-GST purified from toxin B-treated cell lysate is 
inhibited, indicating a modification of Rho itself. Finally, transfection of 
rhoA DNA under the control of a strong promoter into cells protects them from 
the activity of toxin B. Altogether, the data indicate that C. difficile toxin B 
acts directly or indirectly on Rho proteins to inhibit ADP-ribosylation and 
suggest that the cytotoxic effect of toxin B involves Rho.

PMID: 8144660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Lab Anim. 2009 Jul;43(3):304-9. doi: 10.1258/la.2008.008072. Epub 2008 Dec 30.

Clostridial typhlitis associated with topical antibiotic therapy in a Syrian 
hamster.

Alworth L(1), Simmons J, Franklin C, Fish R.

Author information:
(1)Research Animal Diagnostic Laboratory, University of Missouri at Columbia, 
Columbia, MO, USA. alworth@uga.edu

A Syrian hamster that had been treated with topical antibiotic ointment for 10 
days following injuries sustained during fighting was presented moribund. 
Postmortem and microscopic examinations revealed lesions consistent with 
clostridial typhlitis and enteritis. Anaerobic culture of caecal contents 
resulted in the isolation of two Clostridium species, and caecal contents 
contained Clostridium difficile enterotoxins. Based on these findings, a 
diagnosis of acute C. difficile enterotoxaemia was made. This report discusses 
the pathogenesis of C. difficile enterotoxaemia and the potential role of 
topical antibiotic ointment therapy in initiating the disease.

DOI: 10.1258/la.2008.008072
PMID: 19116288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Am J Vet Res. 1980 Aug;41(8):1277-9.

Clostridium difficile-associated cecitis in guinea pigs exposed to penicillin.

Lowe BR, Fox JG, Bartlett JG.

Penicillin treatment resulted in lethal hemorrhagic cecitis in seven of eight 
guinea pigs. Cecal contents at necropsy from all seven animals contained a 
cytopathic toxin which was neutralized by Clostridium sordellii and C difficile 
antitoxins. Bacteriologic cultural examinations of these specimens yielded 
penicillin-sensitive strains of C difficile which produced a similar or 
identical cytotoxin in vitro. Stools obtained before penicillin administration 
and cecal contents from control animals lacked a cytotoxin and cultures failed 
to yield C difficile. Intracecal injection of cell-free supernatant of C 
difficile broth cultures reproduced the lesion noted with penicillin treatment. 
These results implicate C difficile as an agent of penicillin-induced lethal 
hemorrhagic cecitis in guinea pigs.

PMID: 6969561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1999 May;47(5):515-8.

[Susceptibility of Clostridium difficile to metronidazole using the E-test: 
effect of the culture medium].

[Article in French]

Poilane I(1), Cruaud P, Rousseau JG, Torlotin JC, Collignon A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Bondy, France.

The treatment of intestinal Clostridium difficile infections rests on 
administration of either a glycopeptide or metronidazole. Given the current 
shifts in resistance patterns of anaerobes to antimicrobials, a study of the 
susceptibility of C. difficile to metronidazole was timely. The objective of 
this study was to evaluate the influence of the culture medium on the Minimal 
Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) of metronidazole as determined using the E-test. 
Thirty-one strains were grown on three different media supplemented with 5% 
horse blood, namely Columbia agar, Wilkens Chalgren agar, and Brucella agar. 
Results were compared to those obtained using the reference agar dilution method 
(ADM). As recommended by the French Society for Microbiology, susceptibility was 
defined as an MIC < or = 4 mg/L. When used on strains susceptible by the ADM, 
the E-test yielded lower values than the ADM with all three media. Furthermore, 
findings suggest that E-test results obtained with strains whose MIC is in the 4 
to 8 mg/L range by the ADM should be interpreted with caution and, in some 
cases, tested using the ADM.

PMID: 10418031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Xenotransplantation. 2009 Nov-Dec;16(6):472-6. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-3089.2009.00538.x.

Assessment of the potential risk of infection associated with Clostridium 
difficile from porcine xenografts.

Bakri MM(1), Sutherland AD, Brown DJ, Vesely P, Crossan C, Scobie L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Glasgow Caledonian 
University, UK.

There are numerous concerns over the potential for transfer of pathogens between 
species during clinical xenotransplantation, and although current clinical 
application is limited, porcine xenografts have been previously used to treat 
patients with severe burns. Donor animals providing the xenografts are sourced 
from a healthy commercial herd, however, as pigs are a known source of zoonotic 
agents, a number of diseases are required to be excluded from pigs used for 
xenotransplantation purposes. Many studies have indicated the relevance of viral 
zoonoses, however, little has been done with regard to the potential for 
transfer of pathogens related to health care associated infections. Clostridium 
difficile is a major cause of neonatal enteritis in pigs and an important 
feature of this organism is that pigs can be asymptomatic carriers. This study 
has examined the incidence of C. difficile PCR ribotypes present in healthy 
donor pigs to determine if pig faeces, and in particular, contamination of skin 
with faecal matter, is a potential route for the transfer of C. difficile. 
Animals were found to have human ribotype 017 present in the faecal matter, 
however, no C. difficile was isolated from skin samples taken from the same 
animals. In addition, due to the risk factors associated with C. difficile 
infection, the antimicrobial susceptibility of the C. difficile isolates has 
been determined.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-3089.2009.00538.x
PMID: 20042046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Cytobios. 1990;64(258-259):181-96.

Actin and lamin comprised filaments in the nuclei of Chinese hamster ovary cells 
affected with Clostridium difficile enterotoxin A.

Kushnaryov VM(1), Sedmak JJ, Markwald RR, Faculjak ML, Loo PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226.

The major change in the ultrastructure of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells 
treated with Clostridium difficile enterotoxin A was the formation of bundles of 
filaments in the nucleoplasm. The filaments appeared after 2.5 h and disappeared 
by the fourth hour of incubation with the toxin. To partially characterize these 
filaments, laser diffractometry and ultrastructural immunocytochemistry were 
employed. The bundles consist of coiled filaments of about 11 nm and 16 nm 
diameter and a main long axial periodicity of about 26 nm. Postembedding 
immunogold labelling with monoclonal antibodies demonstrated that these 
intranuclear filaments are comprised mainly of actin, but also contain lamin and 
vinculin. Between 2.5 and 3 h of incubation with enterotoxin A, the lamins were 
located close to the nuclear envelope, but they were also consistently found 
scattered in the cytoplasm and nucleoplasm. Such an unusual distribution of 
lamins might mediate the adverse effects of enterotoxin A on nuclear 
organization and function and thus cause the eventual death of CHO cells.

PMID: 2090392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Microb Pathog. 1990 Aug;9(2):141-6. doi: 10.1016/0882-4010(90)90088-8.

Detection of capsule in strains of Clostridium difficile of varying virulence 
and toxigenicity.

Davies HA(1), Borriello SP.

Author information:
(1)Electron Microscopy Support, Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, Middlesex, 
U.K.

Nine toxigenic and six non-toxigenic strains of Clostridium difficile, of 
varying virulence in the hamster model of antibiotic-associated colitis, were 
examined for the presence of a capsule. Antibody stabilisation of the capsule 
with heterologous and/or homologous antiserum fixed in glutaraldehyde, or direct 
fixation in glutaraldehyde/diamine, were used with added ruthenium red to stain 
the capsular glycocalyx. All strains possessed a capsule which was either 
loose-knit or compact, sometimes with attached globular masses. Better capsule 
preservation was achieved in some strains with glutaraldehyde/diamine/ruthenium 
red fixative than with homologous or heterologous antibody stabilisation. The 
possession of a capsule following in vitro growth does not appear to correlate 
with the virulence status of these strains of C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1016/0882-4010(90)90088-8
PMID: 2277588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1987 Jul;31(7):1135-6. doi: 10.1128/aac.31.7.1135.

Treatment of Clostridium difficile colitis in hamsters with a lipopeptide 
antibiotic, LY146032.

Dong MY(1), Chang TW, Gorbach SL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Health, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02111.

LY146032, an acidic lipopeptide antibiotic which inhibits the biosynthesis of 
cell wall peptidoglycan, was found to be effective in delaying death in a 
hamster model of pseudomembranous colitis. A dose of 0.05 mg/day was effective. 
The equivalent protection with vancomycin required a dose 100-fold higher, i.e., 
5 mg/day.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.31.7.1135
PMCID: PMC174884
PMID: 2821892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Infect Immun. 1981 Jul;33(1):285-91. doi: 10.1128/IAI.33.1.285-291.1981.

Purified Clostridium difficile cytotoxin stimulates guanylate cyclase activity 
and inhibits adenylate cyclase activity.

Vesely DL, Straub KD, Nolan CM, Rolfe RD, Finegold SM, Monson TP.

Antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis has been linked with Clostridium 
difficile toxin. We examined the effect of toxins from four strains of C. 
difficile isolated from patients with pseudomembranous colitis on colonic 
adenylate (EC 4.6.1.1) and guanylate cyclase (EC 4.6.1.2) activities. Partially 
purified toxins had a cytotoxic effect on hamster fibroblasts in culture at a 
concentration of 10 ng/ml. Likewise, these toxins enhanced colonic guanylate 
cyclase activity two- to threefold, with the maximal stimulation being at 10 
ng/ml. These toxins also enhanced guanylate cyclase activity in ileum, cecum, 
and duodenum. Both the cytotoxic activity on hamster fibroblasts and the 
enhancement of hamster guanylate cyclase activity were inhibited by antiserum to 
C. difficile toxin. These same toxins inhibited adenylate cyclase activity at a 
100-ng/ml concentration, but had no effect at 10 ng/ml. They also had no effect 
at any concentration on colonic Na+-K+ adenosine triphosphatase. To be sure that 
the findings were not due to a contaminant, a purified C. difficile cytotoxin 
was used, and the same findings were found with the pure cytotoxin (at a 
100-fold-lower concentration). The data suggest that activation of guanylate 
cyclase may be a factor in the pathogenesis of antimicrobial-associated 
pseudomembranous colitis.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.33.1.285-291.1981
PMCID: PMC350687
PMID: 6114928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Clin Microbiol. 1992 Jun;30(6):1544-50. doi: 10.1128/JCM.30.6.1544-1550.1992.

Monoclonal antibodies specific for Clostridium difficile toxin B and their use 
in immunoassays.

Müller F(1), Stiegler C, Hadding U.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Virologie, 
Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Five mouse monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) against Clostridium difficile toxin B 
have been raised and characterized. Three of them were immunoglobulin M (IgM) 
antibodies (6B10, 6G3, and 10B9), and the other two were of the IgG1 isotype 
(9E5 and 17G2), recognizing specifically two distinct epitopes on the toxin B 
molecule. No MAb was able to neutralize cytotoxic activity significantly. The 
two IgG1 MAbs were purified and applied to various immunodiagnostic assays. MAbs 
coupled to latex beads were used for specific removal of toxin B from cytotoxic 
samples and for agglutination assay. An indirect sandwich enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay with MAb 9E5 or 17G2 as the capture antibody was established 
for identification of toxin B with a lower detection limit of 5 ng/ml.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.30.6.1544-1550.1992
PMCID: PMC265326
PMID: 1378062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Microbiol Immunol. 1983;27(6):495-502. doi: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1983.tb00611.x.

Cytotoxin production by Clostridium sordellii strains.

Nakamura S, Tanabe N, Yamakawa K, Nishida S.

A total of 55 strains of Clostridium sordellii, 21 lethal toxin-positive and 34 
lethal toxin-negative, were tested for cytotoxin production in brain heart 
infusion medium supplemented with 0.2% Na2HPO4 (m-BHI) and cooked-meat-glucose 
(CMG) medium using baby hamster kidney (BHK-21/WI-2) cells as indicator cells. 
The m-BHI medium was preferred to CMG medium and 24 hr of incubation was 
sufficient for cytotoxin production. Nineteen of the 21 toxigenic strains were 
also cytotoxigenic, and the strength of the cytotoxigenicity was approximately 
parallel with that of the lethal toxigenicity. Clostridium difficile antitoxin 
neutralized C. sordellii cytotoxin and also C. sordellii antitoxin neutralized 
C. difficile cytotoxin.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.1983.tb00611.x
PMID: 6633300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Med Microbiol. 1993 Feb;38(2):103-8. doi: 10.1099/00222615-38-2-103.

In-vitro and in-vivo characterisation of resistance to colonisation with 
Clostridium difficile.

Larson HE(1), Welch A.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Centre, Medical Research Council, Harrow.

In hamsters, resistance to colonisation by Clostridium difficile appears to be 
mediated by micro-organisms that are present in the gut in relatively low 
concentrations. Small amounts of normal caecal contents inhibited the growth of 
C. difficile when added to cultures in vitro or given to animals which had been 
treated with clindamycin. Filtrates of caecal contents, frozen and thawed 
contents and contents diluted to 0.1% wet weight lost their inhibitory 
properties. However, caecal contents retained their protective capacity after 
culture for 7 days in vitro. Antibiotic treatment altered resistance to 
colonisation by only a few species of clostridia. Faeces of animals treated with 
ampicillin but not clindamycin recovered colonisation resistance after 
incubation at 37 degrees C in vitro. Since human faeces could also restore 
colonisation resistance to hamsters, the hamster model may be useful for the 
study of resistance to colonisation by C. difficile in man.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-38-2-103
PMID: 8429534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Infect Immun. 2007 May;75(5):2562-71. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01656-06. Epub 2007 Feb 
26.

Jun N-terminal protein kinase enhances middle ear mucosal proliferation during 
bacterial otitis media.

Furukawa M(1), Ebmeyer J, Pak K, Austin DA, Melhus A, Webster NJ, Ryan AF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, UCSD School of Medicine, Fir Bldg., Rm. 106, 9500 
Gilman Dr. #0666, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Mucosal hyperplasia is a characteristic component of otitis media. The present 
study investigated the participation of signaling via the Jun N-terminal protein 
kinase (JNK) mitogen-activated protein kinase in middle ear mucosal hyperplasia 
in animal models of bacterial otitis media. Otitis media was induced by the 
inoculation of nontypeable Haemophilus influenzae into the middle ear cavity. 
Western blotting revealed that phosphorylation of JNK isoforms in the middle ear 
mucosa preceded but paralleled mucosal hyperplasia in this in vivo rat model. 
Nuclear JNK phosphorylation was observed in many cells of both the mucosal 
epithelium and stroma by immunohistochemistry. In an in vitro model of primary 
rat middle ear mucosal explants, bacterially induced mucosal growth was blocked 
by the Rac/Cdc42 inhibitor Clostridium difficile toxin B, the mixed-lineage 
kinase inhibitor CEP11004, and the JNK inhibitor SP600125. Finally, the JNK 
inhibitor SP600125 significantly inhibited mucosal hyperplasia during in vivo 
bacterial otitis media in guinea pigs. Inhibition of JNK in vivo resulted in a 
diminished proliferative response, as shown by a local decrease in proliferating 
cell nuclear antigen protein expression by immunohistochemistry. We conclude 
that activation of JNK is a critical pathway for bacterially induced mucosal 
hyperplasia during otitis media, influencing tissue proliferation.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01656-06
PMCID: PMC1865762
PMID: 17325051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 1989 Jan;42(1):94-101. doi: 10.7164/antibiotics.42.94.

Phenelfamycins, a novel complex of elfamycin-type antibiotics. III. Activity in 
vitro and in a hamster colitis model.

Swanson RN(1), Hardy DJ, Shipkowitz NL, Hanson CW, Ramer NR, Coen LJ, Fernandes 
PB.

Author information:
(1)Anti-infective Research Division, Abbott Laboratories, Illinois.

Phenelfamycins A, B, C, E, F and unphenelfamycin make up a recently isolated 
group of elfamycin-type antibiotics. All of the phenelfamycins were active 
against Gram-positive anaerobes, including Clostridium difficile. Phenelfamycin 
A was also active in vitro against Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Streptococci. 
Phenelfamycin A was found to be effective in prolonging the survival of hamsters 
in an animal model of C. difficile enterocolitis. After oral administration of 
phenelfamycin A to hamsters, antibiotic was detected in the caecal contents but 
not in the blood.

DOI: 10.7164/antibiotics.42.94
PMID: 2921230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Gastroenterology. 1996 Nov;111(5):1272-80. doi: 
10.1053/gast.1996.v111.pm8898641.

Substance P activation of enteric neurons in response to intraluminal 
Clostridium difficile toxin A in the rat ileum.

Mantyh CR(1), Pappas TN, Lapp JA, Washington MK, Neville LM, Ghilardi JR, Rogers 
SD, Mantyh PW, Vigna SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Nerves have been suggested to mediate the effects of 
bacterial toxins in intestinal diseases. However, the mechanisms involved are 
unknown. This study examined endogenous substance P (SP) activation of the 
substance P receptor (SPR) on enteric neurons in the rat ileum after exposure to 
intraluminal Clostridium difficile toxin A.
METHODS: After intraluminal injection of toxin A in ileal loops, tissue was 
examined for pathological changes by histology and for SPR activation by 
immunocytochemical analysis of SP-induced SPR endocytosis.
RESULTS: After toxin A administration, > 70% of enteric neurons showed SPR 
endocytosis and became swollen with thickened dendrites. In contrast, SPRs in 
control rats were largely confined to the plasma membrane. Rats denervated of 
primary afferent fibers with neonatal capsaicin injection and animals pretreated 
with a nonpeptide SPR antagonist showed few endosomal SPRs, and the pathological 
inflammatory effects of toxin A were ablated.
CONCLUSIONS: Intraluminal toxin A causes the release of SP from primary afferent 
neurons: this endogenous SP then acts on enteric neurons in the submucosal and 
myenteric plexuses. SP is the primary mediator of an axon reflex mediating 
neurogenic inflammation in the intestine. SPR blockade may prove to be a novel 
therapy used to prevent intestinal inflammation.

DOI: 10.1053/gast.1996.v111.pm8898641
PMID: 8898641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Lab Anim Sci. 1991 Dec;41(6):553-8.

Clostridium difficile typhlitis associated with cecal mucosal hyperplasia in 
Syrian hamsters.

Ryden EB(1), Lipman NS, Taylor NS, Rose R, Fox JG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge 02139.

A sudden increase in mortality occurred in a closed breeding colony of Syrian 
hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus). The colony consisted of approximately 40 
hamsters, 8 of which were affected. Four adult males died suddenly. One pregnant 
female and one weanling died after having been observed as depressed for 1 day 
and 2 weeks respectively. One weanling and one adult male were euthanized. All 
affected hamsters had signs of diarrhea. At necropsy, hemorrhagic fluid-filled 
ceca were noted in five of eight animals. Clostridium difficile cytotoxin B was 
present in high titers [10(-3) to 10(-8)] in cecal contents of six of six 
animals tested, whereas C. difficile culture yielded positive results in only 
one of six animals. Histopathologically, findings consistent with 
Clostridium-induced typhlitis including necrosis, epithelial denudation, 
vascular congestion, and hemorrhage were present in six of six ceca evaluated. 
In addition, signs of a more chronic disease process included cecal mucosal 
hyperplasia in five of six hamsters. A silver stain of cecal hyperplastic mucosa 
for intracellular organisms including Campylobacter-like organisms was negative 
in all affected hamsters. Antibiotics had not been administrated to any hamster 
in this colony, nor had the affected animals been experimentally manipulated. 
Testing for antibiotic residues in the feed was negative, and C. difficile was 
not isolated from feed, water, or feces of unaffected hamsters. Thus C. 
difficile-induced typhlitis should be included in the differential diagnosis of 
deaths in hamsters which have no clinical histories of prior antibiotic 
administration or experimental manipulation.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1667196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Infect Immun. 1981 Nov;34(2):626-8. doi: 10.1128/IAI.34.2.626-628.1981.

Suppression of Clostridium difficile by normal hamster cecal flora and 
prevention of antibiotic-associated cecitis.

Wilson KH, Silva J, Fekety FR.

Administration of normal cecal homogenates decreased numbers of viable 
Clostridium difficile and prevented cecitis in antibiotic-challenged hamsters. 
Cecal anaerobes appeared to suppress C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.34.2.626-628.1981
PMCID: PMC350912
PMID: 7309245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Acta Pathol Microbiol Immunol Scand B. 1983 Dec;91(6):395-400. doi: 
10.1111/j.1699-0463.1983.tb00066.x.

Toxin A of Clostridium difficile: production, purification and effect in mouse 
intestine.

Lönnroth I, Lange S.

Clostridium difficile produces one diarrhoeogenic toxin designed A, and one 
cytopathogenic toxin designed B. Toxin A was purified in a 
four-step-fractionation procedure. In the last purification step the toxin was 
separated by elution with galactose from an agarose gel. The purified toxin A 
induced a clear and watery hypersecretion in intestinal loops of mouse, while 
mixtures of toxin A and B induced a haemorrhagic secretion. At an ED50 value for 
the purified toxin A of 0.5 microgram there was a brief, optimal hypersecretion 
after four hours. Like the fluid secretion induced by cholera toxin, that 
induced by toxin A could be inhibited by chlorpromazine or by depletion of 
intestinal bile. In contrast to cholera toxin, however, toxin A did not activate 
intestinal adenylate cyclase--at least not permanently. Antisera which 
neutralized cholera toxin did not neutralize toxin A, and vice versa.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1699-0463.1983.tb00066.x
PMID: 6673499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 1983 Dec;1(4):331-3. doi: 
10.1016/0732-8893(83)90009-3.

Detection of Clostridium difficile cytotoxin in HEp-2 and CHO cell lines.

Murray PR, Weber CJ.

The detection of Clostridium difficile cytotoxin was compared in two established 
cell lines; Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) and a human epithelial line, HEp-2. All 
specimens with positive toxin assays were detected with the CHO cell line, 
whereas only one-half of positive specimens were detected with the HEp-2 cells.

DOI: 10.1016/0732-8893(83)90009-3
PMID: 6667607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Am J Physiol. 1998 Jul;275(1):G68-75. doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.1998.275.1.G68.

Substance P receptor expression in intestinal epithelium in clostridium 
difficile toxin A enteritis in rats.

Pothoulakis C(1), Castagliuolo I, Leeman SE, Wang CC, Li H, Hoffman BJ, Mezey E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

We previously reported that the inflammatory effects of Clostridium difficile 
toxin A on rat intestine can be significantly inhibited with a specific 
neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1R) antagonist. In this study we investigated the 
localization and expression of NK-1R mRNA and protein in rat intestine by in 
situ hybridization, Northern blot analysis, and immunohistochemistry, 
respectively, after exposure to toxin A. Northern blot analysis showed increased 
mucosal levels of NK-1R mRNA starting 30 min after toxin A administration. In 
situ hybridization showed that toxin A increased NK-1R mRNA expression in 
intestinal epithelial cells after 30, 120, and 180 min. In rats pretreated with 
the NK-1R antagonist CP-96345 the increase in NK-1R mRNA levels after exposure 
to toxin A was inhibited, indicating that NK-1R upregulation is substance P (SP) 
dependent. One hour after exposure to toxin A many of the intestinal epithelial 
cells showed staining for NK-1R compared with controls. Specific 125I-SP binding 
to purified epithelial cell membranes obtained from ileum exposed to toxin A for 
15 min was increased twofold over control and persisted for 4 h. This report 
provides evidence that NK-1R expression is increased in the intestinal 
epithelium shortly after exposure to toxin A and may be important in toxin 
A-induced inflammation.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.1998.275.1.G68
PMID: 9655686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Vet Diagn Invest. 1995 Jul;7(3):343-6. doi: 10.1177/104063879500700308.

Apparent outbreaks of Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea in horses in a 
veterinary medical teaching hospital.

Madewell BR(1), Tang YJ, Jang S, Madigan JE, Hirsh DC, Gumerlock PH, Silva J Jr.

Author information:
(1)Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California, Davis 95616, USA.

Intestinal colonization with toxigenic strains of Clostridium difficile was 
documented in 9 of 10 horses with acute onset diarrhea in a veterinary medical 
teaching hospital, whereas a similar isolate was detected in only 1 of 23 other 
horses without diarrhea in the hospital. One horse with diarrhea was infected 
simultaneously with both C. difficile and Salmonella krefeld. Clostridium 
difficile was detected by fecal culture on selective medium, confirmed with a 
latex particle agglutination test, and identified as toxigenic by polymerase 
chain reaction amplification of toxin A and toxin B gene sequences. Using an 
arbitrarily-primed polymerase chain reaction, 6 distinct C. difficile isolates 
were detected in the feces of the 9 affected horses at the time of the outbreak 
of diarrhea.

DOI: 10.1177/104063879500700308
PMID: 7578449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Infect Dis. 1981 Jan;143(1):51-4. doi: 10.1093/infdis/143.1.51.

Studies on the epidemiology of colitis due to Clostridium difficile in hamsters.

Toshniwal R, Silva J Jr, Fekety R, Kim KH.

Hamsters treated with vancomycin developed enterocolitis significantly more 
often in a conventional animal room than in a room designed to prevent 
cross-infection with Clostridium difficile. In the conventional room C. 
difficile was isolated from cages, food racks, floors, buckets, the hands of 
caretakers, and the stools of animals with enterocolitis but not from untreated 
hamsters, air, or food from freshly opened bags. C. difficile was not isolated 
from environmental sources in the clean room. It was not possible to determine 
which of the sources of the organism was most important in its spread. 
Cross-infection with C. difficile may be important in the pathogenesis of 
antibiotic-associated enterocolitis in hamster colonies.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/143.1.51
PMID: 7217712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Infection. 1988;16(1):36-41. doi: 10.1007/BF01646930.

Infections after experimental cadaver bone marrow transplantation in beagle 
dogs. Transplantations with and without selective gastrointestinal 
decontamination.

Haralambie E(1), Schmidt-Weinmar A.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen.

Experimental transplantations of cadaver bone marrow (BMT) in beagle dogs were 
performed to evaluate the problems and potentials in a preclinical setting. The 
effectiveness of selective decontamination of the gut (SD) and gnotobiotic 
surveillance in preventing infections during longer aplastic periods was 
investigated. Three groups of dogs were compared. Group A: controls. Group B: 
dogs with BMT, without SD and irregular gnotobiotic surveillance. Group C: dogs 
with BMT, with SD and regular gnotobiotic surveillance. The intestinal 
colonization of normal healthy beagles shows similarities as well as 
dissimilarities to the human intestinal microflora. Aerobic potentially 
pathogenic organisms do not colonize the gut of healthy beagles under our 
keeping conditions. SD resulted in a significant decrease in infections with 
Escherichia coli and Plesiomonas. Infections with anaerobes, as well as 
bacterial infections of the respiratory tract were, however, not prevented. The 
intestinal colonization in dogs of group C with Clostridium difficile is another 
obvious effect of SD. The infections encountered during the study indicate the 
importance of the "take" for the clinical significance and outcome of intestinal 
colonization with potentially pathogenic organisms. In order to reduce the drug 
burden of BMT patients, we consider the elimination of routine SD after BMT not 
to be superior to gnotobiotic surveillance and germ-specific short term 
decontamination.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01646930
PMID: 3283036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nat Toxins. 1993;1(6):369-75. doi: 10.1002/nt.2620010608.

Effects of purified Clostridium difficile toxin A in the small intestine of the 
rat in vivo.

Beubler E(1), Schirgi-Degen A, Pabst MA, Pothoulakis C, LaMont JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Karl-Franzens 
University of Graz, Austria.

The action of highly purified Clostridium difficile toxin A was studied in the 
jejunum of rats in vivo. C. difficile toxin A reversed dose-dependently net 
fluid absorption into net fluid secretion, accompanied by an increase in 
prostaglandin E2 but not 5-hydroxytryptamine output into the gut lumen. 
Accordingly, indomethacin but not the 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor antagonists 
ketanserin plus tropisetron were able to inhibit toxin A-induced fluid 
secretion. Atropine and hexamethonium were without effect on the action of toxin 
A, such excluding a nervous mechanism. The cyclic nucleotides cyclic AMP and 
cyclic GMP appear not to be involved in the mediation of the secretory response. 
The reduced cyclic GMP levels are most likely the result of a complete 
destruction of the villus membranes, where the guanylate cyclase is located. 
Histological studies revealed massive damage to intestinal villi, whereas the 
majority of the crypts seem to be unaffected. In conclusion, toxin A-induced 
intestinal fluid secretion appears to be caused mainly by severe mucosal damage. 
PGE2-release may be the consequence of the inflammation accompanying this 
damage. The mechanism seems to be completely different to those of cholera toxin 
or Escherichia coli heat stable enterotoxin.

DOI: 10.1002/nt.2620010608
PMID: 7909488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Food Funct. 2021 Mar 18. doi: 10.1039/d0fo03235b. Online ahead of print.

Impact of encapsulating a probiotic (Pediococcus pentosaceus Li05) within 
gastro-responsive microgels on Clostridium difficile infections.

Xie J(1), Yao M(1), Lu Y(1), Yu M(2), Han S(1), McClements DJ(3), Xiao H(3), Li 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, 
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious 
Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, The First 
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310003, 
China. ljli@zju.edu.cn.
(2)The Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, 310053, China.
(3)Department of Food Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003, 
USA.

Antibiotic treatment is often followed by Clostridium difficile infection (CDI), 
which causes severe diarrhea and other health issues. Oral administration of 
Pediococcus pentosaceus Li05 (Li05) has been shown to have great potential in 
preventing CDI. However, the viability of Li05 is greatly reduced during storage 
and passage through the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, which limits its biological 
activity. In this study, a gastro-responsive microgel was designed to 
encapsulate and protect Li05 to enhance its efficacy against CDI. The viability 
of Li05 encapsulated within the microgels was significantly enhanced during 
long-term storage and after exposure to simulated GI fluids. Moreover, this 
gastro-responsive microgel led to greater sustained release of the probiotic. In 
a mouse CDI model, we found that encapsulated Li05 was better at inhibiting C. 
difficile infection than nonencapsulated Li05, as demonstrated through analysis 
of the probiotic survival rate, spleen weight, colonic histology, and 
inflammatory cytokine levels. Moreover, the gut microbial diversity was enriched 
by treatment with encapsulated Li05. These results suggest that encapsulating 
Li05 within biopolymer microgels may enhance its ability to prevent and treat 
CDI using functional foods, supplements, or pharmaceuticals.

DOI: 10.1039/d0fo03235b
PMID: 33734244


486. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1997 Mar;355(3):328-34. doi: 
10.1007/pl00004950.

Effects of Clostridium difficile toxin B on activation of rat peritoneal mast 
cells.

Wex CB(1), Koch G, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität 
Freiburg, Germany.

Clostridium difficile toxin B that inactivates Rho subfamily proteins by 
glucosylation, inhibited dinitrophenyl-conjugated bovine serum albumin (DNP-BSA) 
and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-induced mast cell activation by 80 to 
90% in a concentration- and time dependent manner with a delay of about 30 min. 
Activation of mast cells by compound 48/80 and calcium ionophore A23187 was 
maximally inhibited by about 50%. Inhibition by toxin B was observed with 
suspended, attached and permeabilised mast cells. C3 ADP-ribosyltransferase, 
which selectively inactivates RhoA,B,C subtype proteins inhibited antigen, 
compound 48/80, PMA, A23187 and GTP[S]-induced degranulation of permeabilised 
mast cells C3-induced inhibition of stimulated histamine release was smaller 
than that observed with toxin B and both inhibitory effects were not additive. 
These findings suggest the involvement of Rho subtype GTPases and additionally, 
of other members of the Rho subfamily GTPases in activation of rat peritoneal 
mast cells.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00004950
PMID: 9089662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Toxicon. 1992 Dec;30(12):1583-9. doi: 10.1016/0041-0101(92)90030-9.

Effect of oral Saccharomyces boulardii treatment on the activity of Clostridium 
difficile toxins in mouse digestive tract.

Corthier G(1), Lucas F, Jouvert S, Castex F.

Author information:
(1)Unité d'Ecologie et de Physiologie du Système Digestif, Jouy-en-Josas, 
France.

Human antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and pseudomembranous colitis are partly 
due to toxin production by Clostridium difficile. It is now well documented that 
Saccharomyces boulardii protects against C. difficile induced diseases. In an 
attempt to understand better the mechanism of this protective effect, the action 
of S. boulardii on a crude toxin preparation was studied in vitro and in vivo. 
The results showed that the yeast had no effect on the toxins in vitro but was 
able to protect mice inoculated with these toxins. Furthermore, the observation 
by scanning electron microscopy that the mucosa of S. boulardii protected mice 
was not damaged suggest that the yeast mainly acts on the intestinal mucosa.

DOI: 10.1016/0041-0101(92)90030-9
PMID: 1488767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Microb Pathog. 1991 Nov;11(5):337-46. doi: 10.1016/0882-4010(91)90019-7.

Isolation of a fibroblast mutant resistant to Clostridium difficile toxins A and 
B.

Florin I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

A mutant of Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts (Don cells), resistant against 
Clostridium difficile toxins A and B, was isolated after mutagenization with 
ethylmethanesulphonate and a two-step selection with toxin B. The mutant, termed 
CdtR-Q, was 10(4) times more resistant to toxin B than wild-type cells and 
cross-resistant to toxin A (10(3) times more resistant). The resistance was 
overcome by increasing the dose of toxin. The resistance has been stable after 
cultivation for 40 generations in the absence of toxin. The morphology of the 
mutant was more epithelial-like than that of the fibroblast parental cells. The 
plating efficiency was about half that of the wild-type, whereas the growth rate 
was the same. The mutant was significantly less sensitive than the wild-type to 
the microfilament-interacting cytochalasins B and D. It was as sensitive as the 
wild-type to endocytosed toxins (diphtheria, pertussis, ricin), to 
microtubule-interacting agents (colchicine, gossypol, nocodazole, taxol, 
vinblastine), and to membrane-damaging toxins with different mechanisms of 
action, with one exception; the mutant was more highly sensitive to the action 
of phospholipase C (with broad substrate-specificity) than the wild-type. The 
results suggest that the mutant has a normal endocytosis, and that the mutation 
does not affect the microtubuli. The results are consistent with a mutation 
affecting the microfilaments in the cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1016/0882-4010(91)90019-7
PMID: 1816487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1981 Jun;19(6):980-6. doi: 10.1128/aac.19.6.980.

Evaluation of eight cephalosporins in hamster colitis model.

Ebright JR, Fekety R, Silva J, Wilson KH.

Eight commonly used cephalosporins were evaluated in the hamster colitis mode. 
They were all found to cause hemorrhagic cecitis and death within 10 days of 
being given as subcutaneous or oral challenges. Necropsy findings were 
indistinguishable from clindamycin-induced cecitis. Bacteria-free cecal filtrate 
obtained from hamsters dying of cephalosporin-induced cecitis contained toxin 
similar or identical to hat produced by Clostridium difficile isolated from the 
cecum of a hamster. Daily oral administration of poorly absorbed cephalosporins 
protected hamsters from clindamycin-induced cecitis and death as long as the 
cephalosporins were continued. The absorbable cephalosporins were ineffective in 
protecting hamsters from clindamycin-induced cecitis. This difference probably 
relates to the lower concentrations of absorbable cephalosporins maintained in 
the ceca of the hamsters. The possible correlation of these findings to human 
cases of cephalosporin-induced pseudomembranous colitis is discussed.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.19.6.980
PMCID: PMC181595
PMID: 6973951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Infect Immun. 1993 Sep;61(9):3988-93. doi: 10.1128/IAI.61.9.3988-3993.1993.

Clostridium difficile toxin A elicits Ca(2+)-independent cytotoxic effects in 
cultured normal rat intestinal crypt cells.

Fiorentini C(1), Donelli G, Nicotera P, Thelestam M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ultrastructures, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

In rat intestinal crypt cells, Clostridium difficile toxin A induces (i) early 
cytoskeletal alterations involving the whole population and (ii) late effects in 
30 to 40% of the cells, consisting mainly of surface blebbing and nuclear 
fragmentation. All these effects were Ca2+ independent and were not abolished by 
protein synthesis inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.61.9.3988-3993.1993
PMCID: PMC281105
PMID: 8359922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1989 Dec 29;165(3):1364-70. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(89)92754-x.

Inhibition of Clostridium difficile toxin A and B by 1,2-cyclohexanedione 
modification of an arginine residue.

Balfanz J(1), Rautenberg P.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Medical Microbiology, University of Kiel, FRG.

Toxin A (enterotoxin) and toxin B (cytotoxin) of Clostridium difficile were both 
inactivated by the arginine specific reagent 1,2-cyclohexanedione. Molecular 
stability during the inactivation process was demonstrated by SDS-PAGE analysis 
showing the same migration rates for modified and unmodified forms of the 230 
kDa toxin A and of the 250 kDa toxin B. Cytotoxicity of both toxins as well as 
mouse lethality of the enterotoxin were drastically decreased as a result of the 
arginine modification. The reaction followed pseudo-first-order kinetics. 
Analysis of the data suggested that modification of a single arginine residue 
was sufficient to abolish the activity of both toxins.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(89)92754-x
PMID: 2610698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Ann Inst Pasteur Microbiol (1985). 1986 Jan-Feb;137A(1):89-96. doi: 
10.1016/s0769-2609(86)80008-4.

[Evaluation of an experimental animal model allowing the study of the cecal 
microflora in the hamster, antagonistic to clostridium difficile].

[Article in French]

Su WJ(1), Bourlioux P, Bournaud M, Besnier MO, Fourniat J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Microbiologie, Centre d'Etudes Pharmaceutiques, Chatenay 
Malabry, France.

The purpose of this study was the development and evaluation of an experimental 
model allowing the investigation of hamster anti-Clostridium difficile coecal 
microflora. The existence of this "barrier" was verified in conventional 
hamsters. Such hamster coecal flora was then orally transferred to C3H germ-free 
mice. In such animals, the "barrier effect" was maintained. After treatment with 
erythromycin, the colonization resistance was always maintained; despite two 
subsequent processes, dilutions of coecal contents (10(-2] and subsequent 
heating of this fluid (70 degrees C, 10 min), the inhibitory activity against C. 
difficile was partially maintained (10(4) UFC/g faeces). The isolation of 
anaerobic strains implicated in colonization resistance will next be carried out 
in an anaerobic chamber using this microflora.

DOI: 10.1016/s0769-2609(86)80008-4
PMID: 3674782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Toxicol Lett. 1986 Dec;34(2-3):261-9. doi: 10.1016/0378-4274(86)90218-3.

Stimulation of enzyme secretion from isolated pancreatic acini by Clostridium 
difficile toxin B.

Vesenka GD, Majumdar AP, Dubick MA, Lyerly DM, Wilkins TD, Silva J Jr, Geokas 
MC.

Exposure of isolated rat pancreatic acini to increasing concentrations (10 ng - 
800 ng/ml) of toxin B from Clostridium difficile produced a biphasic effect on 
the rate of secretion of amylase, trypsinogen, and chymotrypsinogen. Whereas 
doses of toxin B from 10-30 ng/ml increased enzyme secretion by 15-20%, doses 
between 30 ng and 60 ng/ml showed a regression of this effect, whereafter the 
rate of secretion of amylase, trypsinogen, and chymotrypsinogen increased with 
increasing concentrations of the toxin. Toxin B concentration of 800 ng/ml 
enhanced amylase, trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen secretion by 119%, 185% and 
195%, respectively, when compared with the basal level. Stimulation of enzyme 
secretion by toxin B was not affected by the presence of either actinomycin-D or 
cycloheximide, at a concentration which inhibited acinar RNA or protein 
synthesis by 80-90%. Although toxin B as well as CCK8, carbachol and secretin by 
themselves caused significant stimulation in amylase, trypsinogen and 
chymotrypsinogen secretion from isolated pancreatic acini, toxin B together with 
either CCK8, carbachol or secretin produced no further augmentation in enzyme 
secretion than what was observed with the secretagogues alone. It is concluded 
that toxin B of Cl. difficile exerts a direct effect on pancreatic acinar cells 
as evidenced by stimulation of enzyme secretion.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-4274(86)90218-3
PMID: 2432695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Med Dosw Mikrobiol. 1994;46(3):201-6.

[Identification of toxigenic Clostridium difficile strains isolated from 
alimentary tract of dogs by PCR].

[Article in Polish]

Martirosian G(1), Meisel-Mikolajczyk F, Stańczak J, Mierzejewski J, Flis D.

Author information:
(1)Zakład Bakteriologii Klinicznej, Instytutu Biostruktury Akademii Medycznej w 
Warszawie.

Twenty eight Clostridium difficile strains were investigated. Eleven strains 
were toxin A and toxin B gene positive. Four strains were negative for both 
genes. These results correlate with results of cytotoxicity assay. We identified 
13 Clostridium difficile strains toxin A gene positive and toxin B gene 
negative.

PMID: 7996938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Jpn J Med Sci Biol. 1993 Feb;46(1):51-6. doi: 10.7883/yoken1952.46.51.

Immunological comparison of intracellular toxin A and extracellular toxin A from 
Clostridium difficile.

Meng XQ(1), Yamakawa K, Ogura H, Nakamura S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, 
Ishikawa.

Intracellular toxin A and extracellular toxin A of Clostridium difficile were 
compared immunologically. Immunodiffusion tests with anti-intracellular toxin A 
and anti-extracellular toxin A sera showed that these toxins were identical. In 
neutralization tests, both antisera neutralized the homologous and heterologous 
toxins with regard to cytotoxicity, mouse lethality and loop response at nearly 
the same titers. Although intracellular toxin A lacks the hemagglutination (HA) 
activity, anti-intracellular toxin A serum neutralized HA activity of 
extracellular toxin A at the same titer as did anti-extracellular toxin A serum. 
These results suggest that these toxins are immunologically indistinguishable 
and that the intracellular toxin A molecule has an antigenic site(s) for the HA 
activity.

DOI: 10.7883/yoken1952.46.51
PMID: 8230809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Med Microbiol. 1993 Jan;38(1):69-73. doi: 10.1099/00222615-38-1-69.

Purification and characterisation of intracellular toxin A of Clostridium 
difficile.

Meng XQ(1), Kamiya S, Yamakawa K, Ogura H, Nakamura S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, Japan.

After sonic disintegration of Clostridium difficile cells, intracellular toxin A 
was purified to homogeneity by thyroglobulin affinity chromatography (TGAC) 
followed by anion-exchange (Mono Q) by fast protein liquid chromatography 
(FPLC). High haemagglutinating (HA) activity was detected in TGAC-unbound 
fractions (2(9)/50 microliters), but not in TGAC thermal eluates (2(0)/50 
microliters). The low HA titre of the thermal eluates was markedly increased to 
2(5)/50 microliters after dialysis against 0.02 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). A disparity 
in the position of the peaks containing cytotoxic and HA activity was observed 
in the first Mono Q-FPLC step. Intracellular toxin A without HA activity was 
obtained by a second Mono Q-FPLC step. The M(r) of the intracellular toxin A was 
estimated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) to be 580 kDa under 
non-denaturing conditions. The minimum doses of the toxin causing cytotoxicity, 
mouse lethality and enterotoxicity were 0.83 ng, 8.7 ng and 5 micrograms, 
respectively.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-38-1-69
PMID: 8418298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Lab Anim Sci. 1994 Feb;44(1):12-6.

Enterocecocolitis associated with Escherichia coli and Campylobacter-like 
organisms in a hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) colony.

Dillehay DL(1), Paul KS, Boosinger TR, Fox JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of 
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322.

Sporadic diarrhea and weight loss were observed in a breeding colony of Syrian 
hamsters during a 2-year period. Thirteen adult hamsters with diarrhea, 
anorexia, and weight loss were examined. Histologic lesions consisted of diffuse 
nonsuppurative enterocecocolitis and multifocal epithelial proliferation in the 
cecum and colon. Goblet cell hyperplasia was extensive in the colonic mucosa of 
many hamsters. The hamsters in this colony had not been treated with antibiotics 
nor was Clostridium difficile isolated from any of the hamsters. In contrast to 
typical proliferative ileitis in hamsters, most hamsters involved in this 
outbreak were mature adults rather than weanlings, and lesions were 
predominantly inflammatory rather than proliferative and involved small 
intestine, cecum, and colon rather than ileum. The isolation of beta-hemolytic 
Escherichia coli and demonstration of Campylobacter-like organisms by 
transmission electron microscopy and Warthin-Starry staining suggest that these 
two agents were involved in the pathogenesis of this disease. Further studies, 
however, are needed to investigate the pathogenesis of this enteric syndrome in 
hamsters.

PMID: 8007654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Lab Anim. 1989 Jul;23(3):203-7. doi: 10.1258/002367789780810626.

Clostridium difficile-associated typhlitis in specific pathogen free guineapigs 
in the absence of antimicrobial treatment.

Boot R(1), Angulo AF, Walvoort HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Supply, National Institute of Public Health and 
Environmental Protection, Bilthoven, The Netherlands.

Clostridium difficile (toxin) associated typhlitis was diagnosed in untreated 
barrier-maintained specific pathogen free guineapigs. It resembled the 
pathological lesions of antibiotic induced enterocolitis. The possible role of 
limited colonization resistance to C. difficile provided by mouse enteric 
microflora in the pathogenesis of the disease is discussed.

DOI: 10.1258/002367789780810626
PMID: 2527322 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


499. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1991 Jul 1;65(3):311-5. doi: 10.1016/0378-1097(91)90233-z.

Production of monoclonal antibody to Clostridium difficile toxin A which 
neutralizes enterotoxicity but not haemagglutination activity.

Kamiya S(1), Yamakawa K, Meng XQ, Ogura H, Nakamura S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, Japan.

Nine monoclonal antibodies (mAb) to Clostridium difficile toxin A were produced. 
The isotype of one mAb (37B5) was IgG2b, kappa, and that of the other eight mAbs 
was IgM, kappa. Immunoblot analysis after non-denatured PAGE showed that with 
the exception of one mAb (112G6) all mAbs gave a positive reaction with the 540 
kDa band of toxin A. Immunoblot analysis showed that four mAbs (2E15, 3B4, 37B5 
and 49C4) gave a positive reaction with the 240 kDa major band of toxin A. In 
neutralisation tests with these mAbs for enterotoxicity, mouse lethality, 
haemagglutination activity and cytotoxicity, 37B5 neutralised enterotoxicity in 
a rabbit ileal loop response test but did not neutralise any other biological 
activities. None of the other eight mAbs showed any neutralising activities at 
all.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-1097(91)90233-z
PMID: 1916231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Surg Oncol. 1994 Nov;57(3):191-5. doi: 10.1002/jso.2930570311.

Clostridium difficile toxin A therapy for HCT 116 human colon cancer in nude 
mice.

Redlich PN(1), Kushnaryov VM, Hernandez I, Grossberg SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee.

Clostridium difficile toxin A was evaluated for an antitumor effect in vivo on 
HCT 116 human colon carcinoma cells growing subcutaneously in nude mice. A mean 
reduction in tumor volume of at least 65%, by measurement in three dimensions, 
was observed in mice who received two 9- to 13-day courses of daily 
intraperitoneal injections of toxin A as compared to mice receiving diluent 
alone. Reversible adverse effects of toxin A were noted in some animals, 
consisting primarily of liver toxicity and skin rash. HCT 116 cells in toxin 
A-treated mice grew as flattened tumors with ulcerated centers compared to 
rounded tumors without ulceration in controls. Histologic examination of tumors 
from representative mice revealed that two thirds of the tumor in a treated 
mouse was necrotic compared to only one third in a control, suggesting greater 
antitumor efficacy of toxin A than estimated by tumor measurements alone.

DOI: 10.1002/jso.2930570311
PMID: 7967609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


501. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2016 Sep;363(18):fnw204. doi: 10.1093/femsle/fnw204. Epub 
2016 Aug 28.

Evaluation of gastrointestinal leakage using serum (1→3)-β-D-glucan in a 
Clostridium difficile murine model.

Leelahavanichkul A(1), Panpetch W(2), Worasilchai N(2), Somparn P(3), 
Chancharoenthana W(4), Nilgate S(2), Finkelman M(5), Chindamporn A(2), Tumwasorn 
S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand Division of Nephrology, 
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(3)Research Affairs, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn 
University, Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(4)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, Princess Chulabhorn College of Medical Sciences, Chulabhorn Royal 
Academy of Science (CRAS), Vipavadee road, Bangkok 10210, Thailand.
(5)Department of Clinical Development, Associates of Cape Cod, Inc., 124 Bernard 
E. St. Jean Drive, East Falmouth, MA 02536, USA.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, 
Rama 4 Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok 10330, Thailand somying.T@chula.ac.th.

Gastrointestinal (GI) leakage in Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea 
(CDAD) is well known but is not routinely assessed in clinical practice. Serum 
(1→3)-β-D-glucan (BG), a fungal cell wall component used as a biomarker for 
invasive fungal disease, was tested in a CDAD mouse model with and without 
probiotics. Higher serum fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran (FITC-dextran) and 
spontaneous gram-negative bacteremia, GI leakage indicators, were frequently 
found in CDAD mice, which died compared with those which survived. BG, serum 
macrophage inflammatory protein-2 and FITC-dextran but not quantitative blood 
bacterial count differentiated the clinical severity. Interestingly, a specific 
dose of Lactobacillus rhamnosus L34 attenuated CDAD and decreased serum BG and 
FITC-dextran, but not other parameters. BG also showed a higher area under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve for 7-day mortality than FITC-dextran. 
Fifty-five percent of CDAD mice with BG ≥ 60 pg/ml (the human negative cut-off 
value for invasive fungal disease) at 1 day after C. difficile gavage died 
within 7 days. In conclusion, S: erum BG was elevated in mice with severe CDAD, 
an established model of GI leakage with a strong association with mortality 
rate. BG monitoring in patients with CDAD is of interest as both a potential 
prognostic tool and a therapeutic efficacy indicator.

© FEMS 2016. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/femsle/fnw204
PMID: 27573235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Am J Transl Res. 2020 Oct 15;12(10):6204-6219. eCollection 2020.

Clostridium difficile toxin B-induced colonic inflammation is mediated by the 
FOXO3/PPM1B pathway in fetal human colon epithelial cells.

Xu Q(1)(2), Li Y(1)(2), Zheng Y(3), Chen Y(1)(2), Xu X(1)(2), Wang M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Antibiotics, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University Shanghai 200040, 
China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology of Antibiotics, National Health and 
Family Planning Commision Shanghai 200040, China.
(3)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Shanghai University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine Shanghai 201203, China.

Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) toxin B (TcdB) is as an inflammatory 
enterotoxin that accounts for manifestations of widespread healthcare-associated 
C. difficile infection, including colonic inflammation. The present work 
explored the molecular mechanism by which TcdB activates innate immunity and 
stimulates pro-inflammatory cytokine release. Fetal human colon epithelial cells 
(FHCs) were treated with recombinant TcdB protein. Cell growth inhibition and 
apoptosis were measured with Cell Counting Kit-8 and Annexin V-fluorescein 
isothiocyanate Apoptosis Detection Kit, respectively. Flow cytometry analysis 
was also performed. Inflammatory cytokine induction was determined with 
enzykeme-linked immunosorbent assay analyses. Protein expression was assessed by 
western blot analysis. Gene overexpression and knockdown were performed with 
lentiviral transduction. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction was 
used to examine gene expression. Dual-luciferase reporter assays and chromatin 
immunoprecipitation were implemented to explore transcriptional regulation. 
Mouse colon tissues were analyzed with hematoxylin and eosin staining. The 
results show that TcdB-induced cell growth and apoptosis and enhanced expression 
of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha in FHCs. We identified protein 
phosphatase magnesium-dependent 1B (PPM1B) as the key mediator promoting the 
phosphorylation of nuclear factor-κB p65, which accounted for the increase in 
pro-inflammatory cytokines. The findings demonstrate that PPM1B expression is 
directly regulated by the AKT/FOXO3 signaling pathway in FHCs. We confirmed the 
molecular mechanism with in vivo studies using a mouse model infected with C. 
difficile and treated with a phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT signaling inhibitor. 
In conclusion, TcdB induces inflammation in human colon epithelial cells by 
regulating the AKT/FOXO3/PPM1B pathway.

AJTR Copyright © 2020.

PMCID: PMC7653611
PMID: 33194024

Conflict of interest statement: None.


503. J Physiol. 1996 Oct 15;496 ( Pt 2)(Pt 2):317-29. doi: 
10.1113/jphysiol.1996.sp021687.

Role of Rho proteins in carbachol-induced contractions in intact and 
permeabilized guinea-pig intestinal smooth muscle.

Otto B(1), Steusloff A, Just I, Aktories K, Pfitzer G.

Author information:
(1)II. Physiologisches Institut, Universität Heidelberg, Germany.

1. The aim of this study was to determine whether the low molecular mass GTPase 
RhoA or related proteins are involved in carbachol- and high-K(+)-induced 
contractions in intact intestinal smooth muscle as well as the carbachol-induced 
increase in Ca2+ sensitivity of the myofilaments in permeabilized preparations. 
2. The carbachol-induced increase in the Ca2+ sensitivity of force production in 
beta-escin-permeabilized intestinal smooth muscle was enhanced in preparations 
that were loaded with the constitutively active mutant of RhoA, Val14RhoA, and 
was inhibited by exoenzyme C3 from Clostridium botulinum, which ADP-ribosylates 
and inactivates small GTPases of the Rho family. The effect of C3 on Ca2+ 
sensitivity in the absence of the agonist was negligible, while the maximal 
Ca(2+)-activated force was inhibited by about 20%. 3. Inhibition of 
carbachol-induced force was associated with an increase in ADP-ribosylation of a 
protein band with a molecular mass of approximately 22 kDa, corresponding to 
Rho, and was partially reversed in the presence of Ile41RhoA, which is not a 
substrate for C3. Val14RhoA did not restore carbachol-induced Ca2+ sensitization 
in C3-treated smooth muscle. 4. In intact intestinal smooth muscle, toxin B from 
Clostridium difficile, which monoglucosylates members of the Rho family, 
inhibited high-K(+)-induced contractions and the initial phasic response to 
carbachol by about 30%. The delayed contractile response to carbachol was 
completely inhibited. 5. In smooth muscle preparations that were permeabilized 
with beta-escin after treatment with toxin B, carbachol-and GTP gamma S-induced 
Ca2+ sensitization was significantly inhibited. 6. These findings are consistent 
with a role for Rho or Rho-like proteins in agonist-induced increase in Ca2+ 
sensitivity of force production in intact and permeabilized intestinal smooth 
muscle.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.1996.sp021687
PMCID: PMC1160879
PMID: 8910218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


504. Infect Immun. 1989 Dec;57(12):3922-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.57.12.3922-3927.1989.

Interrelationships between digestive proteolytic activities and production and 
quantitation of toxins in pseudomembranous colitis induced by Clostridium 
difficile in gnotobiotic mice.

Corthier G(1), Muller MC, Elmer GW, Lucas F, Dubos-Ramaré F.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Ecologie Microbienne, Institut National de la Recherche 
Agronomique, CRJ, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Clostridium difficile pathogenicity is related to in vivo production of toxins, 
and it is of great interest to detect toxins produced in biological samples. 
Several reports have shown that proteases in stools interfere with immunological 
methods for quantitation of toxin A. The purpose of this work was to estimate 
the relationship between the proteases and the C. difficile toxins produced in a 
gnotobiotic mouse model of pseudomembranous cecitis. Cecal proteolytic 
activities hydrolyzed toxin A, and immunoglobulin G bound to the microtiter 
plate used in immunoassays. This interference could be blocked by the addition 
of trypsin inhibitor to the samples. The ability of soluble toxin A to bind to 
bound antibodies in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was not affected by the 
proteases, but the biological activity was reduced 100-fold. The cytotoxicity of 
toxin B was not modified by proteolytic activity treatment. Mice inoculated with 
a low toxin A-producing strain of C. difficile did not died, and no modulation 
of proteolytic activities occurred. After inoculation with the lethal VPI strain 
of C. difficile, toxins A and B reached maximum levels in the ceca at 12 h 
postinfection. At this time, the proteolytic activities did not decrease from 
the levels seen at zero time. Mice died within 2 days. At this time (about 32 
postinfection), proteolytic activities were sharply decreased in the lower parts 
of the digestive tracts. The findings that serum inhibited the proteases and 
that there was a 100-fold increase in serum-derived mouse immunoglobulins in the 
lumen as the C. difficile infection progressed suggest that the decrease in 
protease activity in the lower digestive tract may be related to the exudation 
of serum from the inflammation process.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.57.12.3922-3927.1989
PMCID: PMC259927
PMID: 2680988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Nature. 2009 Apr 30;458(7242):1176-9. doi: 10.1038/nature07822. Epub 2009 Mar 1.

Toxin B is essential for virulence of Clostridium difficile.

Lyras D(1), O'Connor JR, Howarth PM, Sambol SP, Carter GP, Phumoonna T, Poon R, 
Adams V, Vedantam G, Johnson S, Gerding DN, Rood JI.

Author information:
(1)Australian Bacterial Pathogenesis Program, Department of Microbiology, Monash 
University, Victoria 3800, Australia.

Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of infectious diarrhoea in hospitals 
worldwide, because of its virulence, spore-forming ability and persistence. C. 
difficile-associated diseases are induced by antibiotic treatment or disruption 
of the normal gastrointestinal flora. Recently, morbidity and mortality 
resulting from C. difficile-associated diseases have increased significantly due 
to changes in the virulence of the causative strains and antibiotic usage 
patterns. Since 2002, epidemic toxinotype III NAP1/027 strains, which produce 
high levels of the major virulence factors, toxin A and toxin B, have emerged. 
These toxins have 63% amino acid sequence similarity and are members of the 
large clostridial glucosylating toxin family, which are monoglucosyltransferases 
that are pro-inflammatory, cytotoxic and enterotoxic in the human colon. Inside 
host cells, both toxins catalyse the transfer of glucose onto the Rho family of 
GTPases, leading to cell death. However, the role of these toxins in the context 
of a C. difficile infection is unknown. Here we describe the construction of 
isogenic tcdA and tcdB (encoding toxin A and B, respectively) mutants of a 
virulent C. difficile strain and their use in the hamster disease model to show 
that toxin B is a key virulence determinant. Previous studies showed that 
purified toxin A alone can induce most of the pathology observed after infection 
of hamsters with C. difficile and that toxin B is not toxic in animals unless it 
is co-administered with toxin A, suggesting that the toxins act synergistically. 
Our work provides evidence that toxin B, not toxin A, is essential for 
virulence. Furthermore, it is clear that the importance of these toxins in the 
context of infection cannot be predicted exclusively from studies using purified 
toxins, reinforcing the importance of using the natural infection process to 
dissect the role of toxins in disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07822
PMCID: PMC2679968
PMID: 19252482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Eur J Immunol. 2019 May;49(5):747-757. doi: 10.1002/eji.201848022. Epub 2019 Mar 
10.

Epithelium-specific MyD88 signaling, but not DCs or macrophages, control acute 
intestinal infection with Clostridium difficile.

Mamareli P(1)(2), Kruse F(1), Friedrich C(1)(3)(4), Smit N(5), Strowig T(5), 
Sparwasser T(1)(2), Lochner M(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Infection Immunology, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and 
Clinical Infection Research, a joint venture between the Medical School Hannover 
(MHH) and the Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), Hannover, Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University Medical Center of 
the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Germany.
(3)Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(4)Institute of Systems Immunology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(5)Microbial Immune Regulation, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany.

Infection with Clostridium difficile is one of the major causes of health care 
acquired diarrhea and colitis. Signaling though MyD88 downstream of TLRs is 
critical for initiating the early protective host response in mouse models of C. 
difficile infection (CDI). In the intestine, MyD88 is expressed in various 
tissues and cell types, such as the intestinal epithelium and mononuclear 
phagocytes (MNP), including DC or macrophages. Using a genetic gain-of-function 
system, we demonstrate here that restricting functional MyD88 signaling to the 
intestinal epithelium, but also to MNPs is sufficient to protect mice during 
acute CDI by upregulation of the intestinal barrier function and recruitment of 
neutrophils. Nevertheless, we also show that mice depleted for CD11c-expressing 
MNPs in the intestine display no major defects in mounting an effective 
inflammatory response, indicating that the absence of these cells is irrelevant 
for inducing host protection during acute infection. Together, our results 
highlight the importance of epithelial-specific MyD88 signaling and demonstrate 
that although functional MyD88 signaling in DC and macrophages alone is 
sufficient to correct the phenotype of MyD88-deficiency, these cells do not seem 
to be essential for host protection in MyD88-sufficient animals during acute 
infection with C. difficile.

© 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201848022
PMID: 30802297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


507. Sci Rep. 2017 Jun 16;7(1):3665. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-03982-5.

Bovine antibodies targeting primary and recurrent Clostridium difficile disease 
are a potent antibiotic alternative.

Hutton ML(1), Cunningham BA(1), Mackin KE(1), Lyon SA(1), James ML(1), Rood 
JI(1), Lyras D(2).

Author information:
(1)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and 
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 3800, 
Australia.
(2)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and 
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 3800, 
Australia. dena.lyras@monash.edu.

The increased incidence of antibiotic resistant 'superbugs' has amplified the 
use of broad spectrum antibiotics worldwide. An unintended consequence of 
antimicrobial treatment is disruption of the gastrointestinal microbiota, 
resulting in susceptibility to opportunistic pathogens, such as Clostridium 
difficile. Paradoxically, treatment of C. difficile infections (CDI) also 
involves antibiotic use, leaving patients susceptible to re-infection. This 
serious health threat has led to an urgent call for the development of new 
therapeutics to reduce or replace the use of antibiotics to treat bacterial 
infections. To address this need, we have developed colostrum-derived antibodies 
for the prevention and treatment of CDI. Pregnant cows were immunised to 
generate hyperimmune bovine colostrum (HBC) containing antibodies that target 
essential C. difficile virulence components, specifically, spores, vegetative 
cells and toxin B (TcdB). Mouse infection and relapse models were used to 
compare the capacity of HBC to prevent or treat primary CDI as well as prevent 
recurrence. Administration of TcdB-specific colostrum alone, or in combination 
with spore or vegetative cell-targeted colostrum, prevents and treats C. 
difficile disease in mice and reduces disease recurrence by 67%. C. 
difficile-specific colostrum should be re-considered as an immunotherapeutic for 
the prevention or treatment of primary or recurrent CDI.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-03982-5
PMCID: PMC5473923
PMID: 28623367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This study was partly funded by our industry 
partner, Immuron Limited, who provided input into study design, but had no role 
in data collection and analysis, interpretation or decision to publish or 
preparation of the manuscript. Patent 20160083457 resulted from this work.


508. Nature. 2015 Jan 8;517(7533):205-8. doi: 10.1038/nature13828. Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Precision microbiome reconstitution restores bile acid mediated resistance to 
Clostridium difficile.

Buffie CG(1), Bucci V(2), Stein RR(3), McKenney PT(1), Ling L(4), Gobourne A(4), 
No D(4), Liu H(5), Kinnebrew M(1), Viale A(6), Littmann E(4), van den Brink 
MR(7), Jenq RR(8), Taur Y(1), Sander C(3), Cross JR(5), Toussaint NC(9), Xavier 
JB(9), Pamer EG(10).

Author information:
(1)1] Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Lucille Castori 
Center for Microbes, Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(2)1] Computational Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New 
York 10065, USA [2] Department of Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Dartmouth, North Dartmouth, Massachusetts 02747, USA.
(3)Computational Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York 
10065, USA.
(4)Lucille Castori Center for Microbes, Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(5)Donald B. and Catherine C. Marron Cancer Metabolism Center, Sloan-Kettering 
Institute, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(6)Genomics Core Laboratory, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York 
10065, USA.
(7)1] Bone Marrow Transplant Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Immunology Program, 
Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(8)Bone Marrow Transplant Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(9)1] Lucille Castori Center for Microbes, Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Computational 
Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(10)1] Infectious Diseases Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Lucille Castori 
Center for Microbes, Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York 10065, USA [3] Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering 
Institute, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Jan;12(1):4.
    Cell Host Microbe. 2014 Nov 12;16(5):551-2.
    Cell Metab. 2015 Jan 6;21(1):9-10.
    Nat Biotechnol. 2015 Jan;33(1):47-9.

The gastrointestinal tracts of mammals are colonized by hundreds of microbial 
species that contribute to health, including colonization resistance against 
intestinal pathogens. Many antibiotics destroy intestinal microbial communities 
and increase susceptibility to intestinal pathogens. Among these, Clostridium 
difficile, a major cause of antibiotic-induced diarrhoea, greatly increases 
morbidity and mortality in hospitalized patients. Which intestinal bacteria 
provide resistance to C. difficile infection and their in vivo inhibitory 
mechanisms remain unclear. Here we correlate loss of specific bacterial taxa 
with development of infection, by treating mice with different antibiotics that 
result in distinct microbiota changes and lead to varied susceptibility to C. 
difficile. Mathematical modelling augmented by analyses of the microbiota of 
hospitalized patients identifies resistance-associated bacteria common to mice 
and humans. Using these platforms, we determine that Clostridium scindens, a 
bile acid 7α-dehydroxylating intestinal bacterium, is associated with resistance 
to C. difficile infection and, upon administration, enhances resistance to 
infection in a secondary bile acid dependent fashion. Using a workflow involving 
mouse models, clinical studies, metagenomic analyses, and mathematical 
modelling, we identify a probiotic candidate that corrects a clinically relevant 
microbiome deficiency. These findings have implications for the rational design 
of targeted antimicrobials as well as microbiome-based diagnostics and 
therapeutics for individuals at risk of C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1038/nature13828
PMCID: PMC4354891
PMID: 25337874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


509. J Vet Sci. 2014;15(2):249-58. doi: 10.4142/jvs.2014.15.2.249. Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Equine hyperimmune serum protects mice against Clostridium difficile spore 
challenge.

Yan W(1), Shin KS, Wang SJ, Xiang H, Divers T, McDonough S, Bowman J, Rowlands 
A, Akey B, Mohamed H, Chang YF.

Author information:
(1)Animal Health Diagnostic Center, Departments of Population Medicine and 
Diagnostic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, 
NY 14853, USA.

Clostridium (C.) difficile is a common cause of nosocomial diarrhea in horses. 
Vancomycin and metronidazole have been used as standard treatments but are only 
moderately effective, which highlights the need for a novel alternative therapy. 
In the current study, we prepared antiserum of equine origin against both C. 
difficile toxins A and B as well as whole-cell bacteria. The toxin-neutralizing 
activities of the antibodies were evaluated in vitro and the prophylactic 
effects of in vivo passive immunotherapy were demonstrated using a conventional 
mouse model. The data demonstrated that immunized horses generated antibodies 
against both toxins A and B that possessed toxin-neutralizing activity. 
Additionally, mice treated with the antiserum lost less weight without any sign 
of illness and regained weight back to a normal range more rapidly compared to 
the control group when challenged orally with 10(7) C. difficile spores 1 day 
after serum injection. These results indicate that intravenous delivery of 
hyperimmune serum can protect animals from C. difficile challenge in a 
dose-dependent manner. Hence, immunotherapy may be a promising prophylactic 
strategy for preventing C. difficile infection in horses.

DOI: 10.4142/jvs.2014.15.2.249
PMCID: PMC4087227
PMID: 24136208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest.


510. Mater Med Pol. 1993 Jul-Dec;25(3-4):127-31.

Clostridium difficile toxin A stimulates enzyme secretion from isolated rat 
pancreatic acini.

Małecka-Panas E(1), Triadafilopoulos G, Tsukamoto H, Howitt G, Pothoulakis C, 
LaMont T.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, University of California, VA Med Ctr, Davis.

Although Cl difficile bacteremia and the presence of antibodies to toxin A (TxA) 
have been reported, little information is available at present on TxA effect on 
the functional properties of various visceral organs. We have, therefore, 
examined the in vitro effects of TxA on amylase and trypsin secretion from rat 
isolated pancreatic acini. Dispersed rat pancreatic acini were exposed for 60 
min to different concentrations of highly purified TxA and the rate of amylase, 
trypsin and LDH release were monitored. Free cytosolic calcium release in 
pancreatic acini after toxin A (10(-10)M to 10(-8)M) treatment was measured with 
Fura-2/AM, Ca-indicator dye. TxA (10(-10) to 10(-8)M) increased significantly 
the rate of both the amylase and trypsin secretion without any membrane damage, 
with toxin A exerting its action via calcium dependent pathway as suggested by 
intracellular calcium release measured with Fura-2/AM.

PMID: 7520960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


511. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 16;12(8):e0182307. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182307. 
eCollection 2017.

Epidemiology of Clostridium difficile in infants in Oxfordshire, UK: Risk 
factors for colonization and carriage, and genetic overlap with regional C. 
difficile infection strains.

Stoesser N(1)(2), Eyre DW(1)(2), Quan TP(1)(2), Godwin H(1), Pill G(1), Mbuvi 
E(1), Vaughan A(1)(2), Griffiths D(1)(2), Martin J(3), Fawley W(4), Dingle 
KE(1)(2), Oakley S(5), Wanelik K(1), Finney JM(1)(2), Kachrimanidou M(6), Moore 
CE(1), Gorbach S(7), Riley TV(8), Crook DW(1)(2), Peto TEA(1)(2), Wilcox MH(3), 
Walker AS(1)(2); Modernising Medical Microbiology Informatics Group (MMMIG).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, Oxford University, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Headington, United Kingdom.
(2)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical Research 
Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, United Kingdom.
(3)Leeds Teaching Hospitals and University of Leeds, Department of Microbiology, 
Old Medical School, Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(4)Public Health England (Leeds laboratory), Old Medical School, Leeds General 
Infirmary, Leeds, United Kingdom.
(5)Microbiology Laboratory, John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Medical School, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, University Campus, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(7)Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of 
America.
(8)Microbiology and Immunology, School of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The 
University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Approximately 30-40% of children <1 year of age are Clostridium 
difficile colonized, and may represent a reservoir for adult C. difficile 
infections (CDI). Risk factors for colonization with toxigenic versus 
non-toxigenic C. difficile strains and longitudinal acquisition dynamics in 
infants remain incompletely characterized.
METHODS: Predominantly healthy infants (≤2 years) were recruited in Oxfordshire, 
UK, and provided ≥1 fecal samples. Independent risk factors for 
toxigenic/non-toxigenic C. difficile colonization and acquisition were 
identified using multivariable regression. Infant C. difficile isolates were 
whole-genome sequenced to assay genetic diversity and prevalence of 
toxin-associated genes, and compared with sequenced strains from Oxfordshire CDI 
cases.
RESULTS: 338/365 enrolled infants provided 1332 fecal samples, representing 158 
C. difficile colonization or carriage episodes (107[68%] toxigenic). Initial 
colonization was associated with age, and reduced with breastfeeding but 
increased with pet dogs. Acquisition was associated with older age, Caesarean 
delivery, and diarrhea. Breastfeeding and pre-existing C. difficile colonization 
reduced acquisition risk. Overall 13% of CDI C. difficile strains were 
genetically related to infant strains. 29(18%) infant C. difficile sequences 
were consistent with recent direct/indirect transmission to/from Oxfordshire CDI 
cases (≤2 single nucleotide variants [SNVs]); 79(50%) shared a common origin 
with an Oxfordshire CDI case within the last ~5 years (0-10 SNVs). The 
hypervirulent, epidemic ST1/ribotype 027 remained notably absent in infants in 
this large study, as did other lineages such as STs 10/44 (ribotype 015); the 
most common strain in infants was ST2 (ribotype 020/014)(22%).
CONCLUSIONS: In predominantly healthy infants without significant healthcare 
exposure C. difficile colonization and acquisition reflect environmental 
exposures, with pet dogs identified as a novel risk factor. Genetic overlap 
between some infant strains and those isolated from CDI cases suggest common 
community reservoirs of these C. difficile lineages, contrasting with those 
lineages found only in CDI cases, and therefore more consistent with 
healthcare-associated spread.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0182307
PMCID: PMC5559064
PMID: 28813461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The institution of DWC and 
TEAP received per-case funding from Optimer Pharmaceuticals to support 
fidaxomicin trial patient expenses. DWC and TEAP also received honoraria from 
Optimer Pharmaceuticals for participation in additional meetings related to 
investigative planning for fidaxomicin. MHW has received honoraria for 
consultancy work, financial support to attend meetings and research funding from 
bioMerieux, Optimer, Novacta, Pfizer, Summit, The Medicines Company and 
Viropharma. No other author has a conflict of interest. This does not alter our 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


512. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 19;281(20):14280-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M512958200. Epub 2006 
Mar 16.

Glycans on secretory component participate in innate protection against mucosal 
pathogens.

Perrier C(1), Sprenger N, Corthésy B.

Author information:
(1)R & D Laboratory of the Division of Immunology and Allergy, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

In mucosal secretions, secretory component (SC) is found either free or bound to 
polymeric IgA within the secretory IgA complex. SC displays numerous and various 
glycans, which are potential ligands for bacterial compounds. We first 
established that human SC (hSC) purified from colostrum (hSCcol) or produced in 
Chinese hamster ovary cells (hSCrec) exhibits the same lectin reactivity. Both 
forms bind to Clostridium difficile toxin A and functionally protect polarized 
Caco-2 cell monolayers from the cytopathic effect of the toxin. The interaction 
is mediated by glycans present on hSC and involves galactose and sialic acid 
residues. hSCcol and hSCrec were also shown to bind enteropathogenic Escherichia 
coli adhesin intimin and to inhibit its infectivity on HEp-2 cells in a 
glycan-dependent manner as well. SC remained operative in the context of the 
whole secretory IgA molecule and can therefore enhance its Fab-mediated 
neutralizing properties. On the contrary, hSC did not interact with three 
different strains of rotavirus (RF, RRV, and SA11). Accordingly, infection of 
target MA104 cells with these rotavirus strains was not reduced in the presence 
of either form of hSC tested. Although not a universal mechanism, these findings 
identify hSC as a microbial scavenger contributing to the antipathogenic arsenal 
that protects the body epithelial surfaces.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M512958200
PMID: 16543244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


513. Free Radic Res. 2019 Aug;53(8):932-940. doi: 10.1080/10715762.2019.1649670. Epub 
2019 Aug 13.

NOX4 inhibition protects enteric glial cells against Clostridium difficile toxin 
B toxicity via attenuating oxidative and Endoplasmic reticulum stresses.

Jiang Y(1), Xu L(1), Yu L(1), Xu X(1), Feng C(1), Li J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Wuxi People's Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing 
Medical University , Wuxi , China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University , Nanjing , China.

Enteric glial cells (EGCs), one main cell population of the enteric nervous 
system (ENS), play a major role in regulating intestinal barrier function. 
Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB) is the major virulence factor produced by 
C. difficile and estimated to be toxic to EGCs by inducing cell death, cell 
cycle arrest, and inflammatory cytokine production; however, the detailed 
mechanism for such effect is still unclear. In this study, we further evaluated 
the toxic effect of TcdB on EGCs and the involvement of NADPH oxidases in such 
process using the rat-transformed EGCs (CRL-2690). The results showed that NOX4 
was activated by TcdB in EGCs and functioned as the major factor causing 
cytotoxicity and cell apoptosis. Mechanically, NOX4-generated H2O2 was the 
inducer of oxidative stress, Ca2+ homeostasis disorder, and ER stress in EGCs 
upon TcdB treatment, and NOX4 inhibition protected EGCs against TcdB toxicity 
via attenuating these dysfunctions. These findings contribute to our 
understanding of the mechanism by which TcdB affects EGCs and suggest the 
potential value of NOX4 inhibition for treatment against C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1080/10715762.2019.1649670
PMID: 31370714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


514. Neurosci Lett. 2000 Oct 6;292(2):95-8. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(00)01451-8.

Extrinsic surgical denervation inhibits Clostridium difficile toxin A-induced 
enteritis in rats.

Mantyh CR(1), McVey DC, Vigna SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Durham VA Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Clostridium difficile enteritis is caused by toxin A (TA) which stimulates 
substance P release and subsequent receptor activation. This receptor 
stimulation results in secretion, inflammation, and structural damage. However, 
it is unclear as to which subset of neurons is required to initiate substance P 
release following toxin stimulation. Five centimeter ileal segments were 
surgically denervated. After 10 days, three ileal loops were constructed in each 
rat: the denervated loop was injected intraluminally with 5 microg of TA and two 
intact loops were injected with TA or vehicle, respectively. Ileal secretion, 
myeloperoxidase activity, and histology were then assessed. Denervated ileal 
loops injected with TA had a 75% reduction in ileal secretion (P < 0.001), 92% 
reduction in myeloperoxidase activity (P < 0.01) and 96% reduction in histologic 
damage (P < 0.001) compared to innervated loops. There were no significant 
differences between the denervated loops injected with TA and those injected 
with vehicle. Extrinsic surgical denervation results in protection of ileal 
loops from TA enteritis. Furthermore, these results exclude the participation of 
intrinsic enteric nerves in TA-induced ileal damage. Finally, this suggests that 
extrinsic primary sensory neurons mediate the effects of intraluminal TA in the 
ileum.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(00)01451-8
PMID: 10998557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


515. FASEB J. 2019 Apr;33(4):4883-4892. doi: 10.1096/fj.201801440R. Epub 2018 Dec 28.

Cytotoxicity of Clostridium difficile toxins A and B requires an active and 
functional SREBP-2 pathway.

Papatheodorou P(1), Song S(1), López-Ureña D(2), Witte A(1), Marques F(1), Ost 
GS(1), Schorch B(1), Chaves-Olarte E(2), Aktories K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle and Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Medizinische Fakultät, Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; 
and.
(2)Centro de Investigación en Enfermedades Tropicales, Facultad de 
Microbiología, Universidad de Costa Rica, San José, Costa Rica.

Clostridium difficile is associated with antibiotic-associated diarrhea and 
pseudomembranous colitis in humans. Its 2 major toxins, toxins A and B, enter 
host cells and inactivate GTPases of the Ras homologue/rat sarcoma family by 
glucosylation. Pore formation of the toxins in the endosomal membrane enables 
the translocation of their glucosyltransferase domain into the cytosol, and 
membrane cholesterol is crucial for this process. Here, we asked whether the 
activity of the sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2 (SREBP-2) pathway, 
which regulates the cholesterol content in membranes, affects the susceptibility 
of target cells toward toxins A and B. We show that the SREBP-2 pathway is 
crucial for the intoxication process of toxins A and B by using pharmacological 
inhibitors (PF-429242, 25-hydroxycholesterol) and cells that are specifically 
deficient in SREBP-2 pathway signaling. SREBP-2 pathway inhibition disturbed the 
cholesterol-dependent pore formation of toxin B in cellular membranes. 
Preincubation with the cholesterol-lowering drug simvastatin protected cells 
from toxin B intoxication. Inhibition of the SREBP-2 pathway was without effect 
when the enzyme portion of toxin B was introduced into target cells via the cell 
delivery property of anthrax protective antigen. Taken together, these findings 
allowed us to identify the SREBP-2 pathway as a suitable target for the 
development of antitoxin therapeutics against C. difficile toxins A and 
B.-Papatheodorou, P., Song, S., López-Ureña, D., Witte, A., Marques, F., Ost, G. 
S., Schorch, B., Chaves-Olarte, E., Aktories, K. Cytotoxicity of Clostridium 
difficile toxins A and B requires an active and functional SREBP-2 pathway.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.201801440R
PMID: 30592645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


516. Gut. 2018 May;67(5):860-871. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2016-313510. Epub 2017 Feb 20.

Toxin-positive Clostridium difficile latently infect mouse colonies and protect 
against highly pathogenic C. difficile.

Etienne-Mesmin L(1), Chassaing B(1), Adekunle O(2), Mattei LM(3), Bushman FD(4), 
Gewirtz AT(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Inflammation Immunity and Infection, Institute for Biomedical 
Sciences, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Immunology and Molecular Pathogenesis Graduate Program, Emory University, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)PennCHOP Microbiome, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Clostridium difficile is a toxin-producing bacterium and a leading 
cause of antibiotic-associated disease. The ability of C. difficile to form 
spores and infect antibiotic-treated persons at low multiplicity of infection 
(MOI) underlies its large disease burden. However, C. difficile-induced disease 
might also result from long-harboured C. difficile that blooms in individuals 
administered antibiotics.
DESIGN: Mice purchased from multiple vendors and repeatedly testing negative for 
this pathogen by quantitative PCR bloomed C. difficile following antibiotic 
treatment. This endogenous C. difficile strain, herein termed LEM1, which formed 
spores and produced toxin, was compared with highly pathogenic C. difficile 
strain VPI10463.
RESULTS: Whole-genome sequencing revealed that LEM1 and VPI10463 shared 95% of 
their genes, including all known virulence genes. In contrast to VPI10463, LEM1 
did not induce overt disease when administered to antibiotic-treated or 
germ-free mice, even at high doses. Rather, blooms of LEM1 correlated with 
survival following VPI10463 inoculation, and exogenous administration of LEM1 
before or shortly following VPI10463 inoculation prevented C. difficile-induced 
death. Accordingly, despite similar growth properties in vitro, LEM1 strongly 
outcompeted VPI10463 in mice even at 100-fold lower inocula.
CONCLUSIONS: These results highlight the difficulty of determining whether 
individual cases of C. difficile infection resulted from a bloom of endogenous 
C. difficile or a new exposure to this pathogen. In addition to impacting the 
design of studies using mouse models of C. difficile-induced disease, this study 
identified, isolated and characterised an endogenous murine spore-forming C. 
difficile strain able to decrease colonisation, associated disease and death 
induced by a pathogenic C. difficile strain.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2016-313510
PMCID: PMC5941301
PMID: 28219893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


517. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2013 Nov 15;305(10):G697-711. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00184.2013. Epub 2013 Sep 26.

Loss of NHE3 alters gut microbiota composition and influences Bacteroides 
thetaiotaomicron growth.

Engevik MA(1), Aihara E, Montrose MH, Shull GE, Hassett DJ, Worrell RT.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Univ. of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267. Roger.Worrell@uc.edu.

Changes in the intestinal microbiota have been linked to diabetes, obesity, 
inflammatory bowel disease, and Clostridium difficile (C. difficile)-associated 
disease. Despite this, it remains unclear how the intestinal environment, set by 
ion transport, affects luminal and mucosa-associated bacterial composition. 
Na(+)/H(+)-exchanger isoform 3 (NHE3), a target of C. difficile toxin B, plays 
an integral role in intestinal Na(+) absorption. Thus the NHE3-deficient mouse 
model was chosen to examine the effect of pH and ion composition on bacterial 
growth. We hypothesized that ion transport-induced change in the intestinal 
environment would lead to alteration of the microbiota. Region-specific changes 
in ion composition and pH correlated with region-specific alteration of luminal 
and mucosal-associated bacteria with general decreases in Firmicutes and 
increases in Bacteroidetes members. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (B. 
thetaiotaomicron) increased in NHE3(-/-) terminal ileum and was examined in 
vitro to determine whether altered Na(+) was sufficient to affect growth. 
Increased in vitro growth of B. thetaiotaomicron occurred in 43 mM Na(+) 
correlating with the NHE3(-/-) mouse terminal ileum [Na(+)]. NHE3(-/-) terminal 
ileum displayed increased fut2 mRNA and fucosylation correlating with B. 
thetaiotaomicron growth. Inoculation of B. thetaiotaomicron in wild-type and 
NHE3(-/-) terminal ileum organoids displayed increased fut2 and fucosylation, 
indicating that B. thetaiotaomicron alone is sufficient for the increased 
fucosylation seen in vivo. These data demonstrate that loss of NHE3 alters the 
intestinal environment, leading to region-specific changes in bacteria, and shed 
light on the growth requirements of some gut microbiota members, which is vital 
for creating better treatments of complex diseases with an altered gut 
microbiota.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00184.2013
PMCID: PMC3840232
PMID: 24072680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


518. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2012 Aug;56(8):4103-11. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00360-12. 
Epub 2012 May 14.

Amixicile, a novel inhibitor of pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase, shows 
efficacy against Clostridium difficile in a mouse infection model.

Warren CA(1), van Opstal E, Ballard TE, Kennedy A, Wang X, Riggins M, 
Olekhnovich I, Warthan M, Kolling GL, Guerrant RL, Macdonald TL, Hoffman PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and International 
Health, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a serious diarrheal disease that often 
develops following prior antibiotic usage. One of the major problems with 
current therapies (oral vancomycin and metronidazole) is the high rate of 
recurrence. Nitazoxanide (NTZ), an inhibitor of pyruvate:ferredoxin 
oxidoreductase (PFOR) in anaerobic bacteria, parasites, Helicobacter pylori, and 
Campylobacter jejuni, also shows clinical efficacy against CDI. From a library 
of ∼250 analogues of NTZ, we identified leads with increased potency for PFOR. 
MIC screens indicated in vitro activity in the 0.05- to 2-μg/ml range against C. 
difficile. To improve solubility, we replaced the 2-acetoxy group with 
propylamine, producing amixicile, a soluble (10 mg/ml), nontoxic (cell-based 
assay) lead that produced no adverse effects in mice by oral or intraperitoneal 
(i.p.) routes at 200 mg/kg of body weight/day. In initial efficacy testing in 
mice treated (20 mg/kg/day, 5 days each) 1 day after receiving a lethal inoculum 
of C. difficile, amixicile showed slightly less protection than did vancomycin 
by day 5. However, in an optimized CDI model, amixicile showed equivalence to 
vancomycin and fidaxomicin at day 5 and there was significantly greater survival 
produced by amixicile than by the other drugs on day 12. All three drugs were 
comparable by measures of weight loss/gain and severity of disease. Recurrence 
of CDI was common for mice treated with vancomycin or fidaxomicin but not for 
mice receiving amixicile or NTZ. These results suggest that gut repopulation 
with beneficial (non-PFOR) bacteria, considered essential for protection against 
CDI, rebounds much sooner with amixicile therapy than with vancomycin or 
fidaxomicin. If the mouse model is indeed predictive of human CDI disease, then 
amixicile, a novel PFOR inhibitor, appears to be a very promising new candidate 
for treatment of CDI.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00360-12
PMCID: PMC3421617
PMID: 22585229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


519. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Sep 24;62(10):e00925-18. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00925-18. Print 2018 Oct.

Antibiotic-Induced Dysbiosis Predicts Mortality in an Animal Model of 
Clostridium difficile Infection.

Burdet C(1)(2), Sayah-Jeanne S(3), Nguyen TT(1), Hugon P(3), Sablier-Gallis 
F(3), Saint-Lu N(3), Corbel T(3), Ferreira S(4), Pulse M(5), Weiss W(5), 
Andremont A(1), Mentré F(#)(1)(2), de Gunzburg J(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)INSERM and Paris Diderot University, IAME, UMR 1137, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistic and Clinical Research, Bichat 
Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Da Volterra, Paris, France.
(4)GenoScreen, Lille, France.
(5)University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.
(6)Da Volterra, Paris, France gunzburg@davolterra.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Antibiotic disruption of the intestinal microbiota favors colonization by 
Clostridium difficile Using a charcoal-based adsorbent to decrease intestinal 
antibiotic concentrations, we studied the relationship between antibiotic 
concentrations in feces and the intensity of dysbiosis and quantified the link 
between this intensity and mortality. We administered either moxifloxacin (n = 
70) or clindamycin (n = 60) to hamsters by subcutaneous injection from day 1 
(D1) to D5 and challenged them with a C. difficile toxigenic strain at D3 
Hamsters received various doses of a charcoal-based adsorbent, DAV131A, to 
modulate intestinal antibiotic concentrations. Gut dysbiosis was evaluated at D0 
and D3 using diversity indices determined from 16S rRNA gene profiling. Survival 
was monitored until D16 We analyzed the relationship between fecal antibiotic 
concentrations and dysbiosis at the time of C. difficile challenge and studied 
their capacity to predict subsequent death of the animals. Increasing doses of 
DAV131A reduced fecal concentrations of both antibiotics, lowered dysbiosis, and 
increased survival from 0% to 100%. Mortality was related to the level of 
dysbiosis (P < 10-5 for the change of Shannon index in moxifloxacin-treated 
animals and P < 10-9 in clindamycin-treated animals). The Shannon diversity 
index and unweighted UniFrac distance best predicted death, with areas under the 
receiver operating curve (ROC) of 0.89 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.82, 
0.95) and 0.95 (0.90, 0.98), respectively. Altogether, moxifloxacin and 
clindamycin disrupted the diversity of the intestinal microbiota with a 
dependency on the DAV131A dose; mortality after C. difficile challenge was 
related to the intensity of dysbiosis in similar manners with the two 
antibiotics.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00925-18
PMCID: PMC6153837
PMID: 30061286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


520. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1991 Jun;35(6):1108-11. doi: 10.1128/aac.35.6.1108.

In vitro and in vivo evaluation of tiacumicins B and C against Clostridium 
difficile.

Swanson RN(1), Hardy DJ, Shipkowitz NL, Hanson CW, Ramer NC, Fernandes PB, 
Clement JJ.

Author information:
(1)Anti-Infective Research Division, Abbott Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois 
60064-3500.

Tiacumicins B and C are members of a novel group of 18-membered macrolide 
antibiotics with in vitro activity against Clostridium difficile. The MICs 
against 15 strains of C. difficile were 0.12 to 0.25 microgram/ml for tiacumicin 
B, 0.25 to 1 microgram/ml for tiacumicin C, and 0.5 to 1 microgram/ml for 
vancomycin. The resistance frequency for both compounds against C. difficile was 
less than 2.8 x 10(-8) at four and eight times the MIC. The in vivo activities 
of the tiacumicins against two strains of C. difficile were compared with that 
of vancomycin in a hamster model of antibiotic-associated colitis. Oral therapy 
with 0.2, 1, or 5 mg of tiacumicin B or C per kg of body weight protected 100% 
of clindamycin-treated hamsters exposed to C. difficile ATCC 9689. Oral 
treatment with identical doses of vancomycin produced a prolonged, 
dose-dependent survival of hamsters, but it did not prevent the development of 
fatal colitis at doses of up to 5 mg/kg. When clindamycin-treated animals were 
exposed to another strain of C. difficile, both tiacumicin B and vancomycin were 
protective at 5 mg/kg, but not at lower doses. Tiacumicin C was not tested in 
vivo against the second strain of C. difficile. No tiacumicin B or C was 
detected in the sera of hamsters treated with single oral doses of 25 mg/kg, 
while antibiotic levels in the ceca of these hamsters reached 248 micrograms/ml 
and 285 mg/ml for tiacumicins B and C, respectively. The tiacumicins 
demonstrated in vitro and in vivo potencies against C. difficile and achieved 
high concentrations in the cecum, but not the serum, of hamsters after oral 
administration.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.35.6.1108
PMCID: PMC284295
PMID: 1929250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


521. J Vet Med Sci. 2007 Sep;69(9):973-5. doi: 10.1292/jvms.69.973.

Colitis associated with Clostridium difficile in specific-pathogen-free C3H-scid 
mice.

Kawano A(1), Ikeda M, Iritani R, Kinoshita A, Watanabe K, Hayao T, Kokubo T, 
Matsushita S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Animal Development and Research Group, Research Center for 
Radiation Safety, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, 4-9-1 Anagawa, 
Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8555, Japan.

Soft feces and a decreased delivery rate were observed in a 
specific-pathogen-free (SPF) C3H-scid mouse breeding colony. Grossly, the ceca 
were shrunken and edematous in the affected mice. Histopathologically, severe 
edema in the cecal submucosa as well as infiltration of inflammatory cells in 
the lamina propria and submucosa of the ceca and colon were observed. No 
pathogenic microorganisms were detected by the routine microbiological tests. By 
anaerobic bacterial-examination, Clostridium (C.) difficile with toxin A was 
isolated from the cecal contents of the affected mice. The mice were diagnosed 
with C. difficile-associated colitis. This case appears to be the first report 
of natural infection with C. difficile in SPF mice with clinical signs.

DOI: 10.1292/jvms.69.973
PMID: 17917386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


522. Pathog Immun. 2017 Jan 18;2(1):1-20. doi: 10.20411/pai.v2i1.159.

IMPACT OF TIGECYCLINE VERSUS OTHER ANTIBIOTICS ON THE FECAL METABOLOME AND ON 
COLONIZATION RESISTANCE TO CLOSTRIDIUM DIFFICILE IN MICE.

Jump RL(1), Kraft D(2), Hurless K(2), Polinkovsky A(2), Donskey CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Infectious Diseases Division, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH; Geriatric Research, Education and 
Clinical Center, Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, OH.
(2)Department of Medicine, Infectious Diseases Division, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH.

BACKGROUND: The glycylcycline antibiotic tigecycline may have a relatively low 
propensity to promote Clostridium difficile infection in part because it causes 
less disruption of the indigenous intestinal microbiota than other 
broad-spectrum antibiotics. We used a mouse model to compare the effects of 
tigecycline versus other commonly used antibiotics on colonization resistance to 
C. difficile and on the metabolic functions of the intestinal microbiota.
METHODS: To assess in vivo colonization resistance to C. difficile, mice were 
challenged with oral C. difficile spores 1, 7, or 12 days after completion of 3 
days of treatment with subcutaneous saline, tigecycline, ceftriaxone, 
piperacillin-tazobactam, or linezolid. Levels of bacterial metabolites in fecal 
specimens of mice treated with the same antibiotics were analyzed using 
non-targeted metabolic profiling by gas chromatograph (GC)/mass spectrometry 
(MS) and ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem MS (UPLC-MS/MS).
RESULTS: All of the antibiotics disrupted colonization resistance to C. 
difficile when challenge occurred 2 days after treatment. Only 
piperacillin/tazobactam mice had disturbed colonization resistance at 7 days 
after treatment. All of the antibiotics altered fecal metabolites in comparison 
to controls, but tigecycline caused significantly less alteration than the other 
antibiotics, including less suppression of multiple amino acids, bile acids, and 
lipid metabolites.
CONCLUSIONS: Tigecycline, linezolid, and ceftriaxone caused transient disruption 
of colonization resistance to C. difficile, whereas piperacillin/tazobactam 
caused disruption that persisted for 7 days post-treatment. Tigecycline caused 
less profound alteration of fecal bacterial metabolites than the other 
antibiotics, suggesting that the relatively short period of disruption of 
colonization resistance might be related in part to reduced alteration of the 
metabolic functions of the microbiota.

DOI: 10.20411/pai.v2i1.159
PMCID: PMC5315001
PMID: 28217763


523. J Biomed Sci. 2015 Aug 7;22(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s12929-015-0171-x.

Recombinant lipoprotein-based vaccine candidates against C. difficile 
infections.

Huang JH(1)(2), Wu CW(3), Lien SP(4), Leng CH(5), Hsiao KN(6), Liu SJ(7), Chen 
HW(8), Siu LK(9), Chong P(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. 981046@nhri.org.tw.
(2)Graduate Institute of Life Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan. 981046@nhri.org.tw.
(3)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. startup@nhri.org.tw.
(4)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. lenharry@nhri.org.tw.
(5)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. leoleng@nhri.org.tw.
(6)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. sunnyboy@nhri.org.tw.
(7)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. levent@nhri.org.tw.
(8)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. chenhw@nhri.org.tw.
(9)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. lksiu@nhri.org.tw.
(10)Vaccine R&D Center, National Institute of Infectious Diseases and 
Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County, 
Taiwan. pelechong@nhri.org.tw.
(11)Graduate Institute of Life Science, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan. pelechong@nhri.org.tw.
(12)Graduate Institute of Immunology, China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan. pelechong@nhri.org.tw.

BACKGROUND: Opportunistically nosocomial infections in hospitalized patients are 
often related to Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) due to disruption of the 
intestinal micro-flora by antibiotic therapies during hospitalization. 
Clostridial exotoxins A and B (TcdA and TcdB) specifically bind to unknown 
glycoprotein(s) in the host intestine, disrupt the intestinal barrier leading to 
acute inflammation and diarrhea. The C-terminal receptor binding domain of TcdA 
(A-rRBD) has been shown to elicit antibody responses that neutralize TcdA 
toxicity in Vero cell cytotoxicity assays, but not effectively protect hamsters 
against a lethal dose challenge of C. difficile spores. To develop an effective 
recombinant subunit vaccine against CDI, A-rRBD was lipidated (rlipoA-RBD) as a 
rational design to contain an intrinsic adjuvant, a toll-like receptor 2 agonist 
and expressed in Escherichia coli.
RESULTS: The purified rlipoA-RBD was characterized immunologically and found to 
have the following properties: (a) mice, hamsters and rabbits vaccinated with 3 
μg of rlipoA-RBD produced strong antibody responses that neutralized TcdA 
toxicity in Vero cell cytotoxicity assays; furthermore, the neutralization titer 
was comparable to those obtained from antisera immunized either with 10 μg of 
TcdA toxoid or 30 μg of A-rRBD; (b) rlipoA-RBD elicited immune responses and 
protected mice from TcdA challenge, but offered insignificant protection (10 to 
20 %) against C. difficile spores challenge in hamster models; (c) only 
rlipoA-RBD formulated with B-rRBD consistently confers protection (90 to 100 %) 
in the hamster challenge model; and (d) rlipoA-RBD was found to be 10-fold more 
potent than A-rRBD as an adjuvant to enhancing immune responses against a poor 
antigen such as ovalbumin.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that rlipoA-RBD formulated with B-rRBD could 
be an excellent vaccine candidate for preclinical studies and future clinical 
trials.

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-015-0171-x
PMCID: PMC4527207
PMID: 26245825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


524. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2017 Mar 1;49(3):228-237. doi: 
10.1093/abbs/gmw139.

Salubrinal protects against Clostridium difficile toxin B-induced CT26 cell 
death.

Chen S(1), Sun C(1), Gu H(1), Wang H(1), Li S(1), Ma Y(1), Wang J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China.

Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) is considered to be the major cause of the 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis in animals and 
humans. The prevalence of C. difficile infections (CDI) has been increasing 
since 2000. Two exotoxins of C. difficile, Toxin A (TcdA) and Toxin B (TcdB), 
are the main virulence factors of CDI, which can induce glucosylation of Rho 
GTPases in host cytosol, leading to cell morphological changes, cell apoptosis, 
and cell death. The mechanism of TcdB-induced cell death has been investigated 
for decades, but it is still not completely understood. It has been reported 
that TcdB induces endoplasmic reticulum stress via PERK-eIF2α signaling pathway 
in CT26 cell line (BALB/C mouse colon tumor cells). In this study, we found that 
salubrinal, a selective inhibitor of eIF2α dephosphorylation, efficiently 
protects CT26 cell line against TcdB-induced cell death and tried to explore the 
mechanism underlying in this protective effect. Our results demonstrated that 
salubrinal protects CT26 cells from TcdB-mediated cytotoxic and cytopathic 
effect, inhibits apoptosis and death of the toxin-exposed cells via 
caspase-9-dependent pathway, eIF2α signaling pathway, and autophagy. These 
findings will be helpful for the development of CDI therapies.

© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological 
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/abbs/gmw139
PMID: 28119311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


525. Cell Microbiol. 2013 Oct;15(10):1674-87. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12139. Epub 2013 Apr 
11.

CbpA: a novel surface exposed adhesin of Clostridium difficile targeting human 
collagen.

Tulli L(1), Marchi S, Petracca R, Shaw HA, Fairweather NF, Scarselli M, Soriani 
M, Leuzzi R.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Vaccines and Diagnostics Srl, Siena, Italy.

Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea 
and pseudomembranous colitis. While the role of toxins in pathogenesis has been 
extensively described, the contribution of surface determinants to intestinal 
colonization is still poorly understood. We focused our study on a novel member 
of the MSCRAMM family, named CbpA (Collagen binding protein A), for its adhesive 
properties towards collagen. We demonstrate that CbpA, which carries an 
LPXTG-like cell wall anchoring domain, is expressed on the bacterial surface of 
C. difficile and that the recombinant protein binds at high affinity to 
collagens I and V (apparent Kd in the order of 10(-9 ) M). These findings were 
validated by confocal microscopy studies showing the colocalization of the 
protein with type I and V collagen fibres produced by human fibroblasts and 
mouse intestinal tissues. However, the collagen binding activity of the 
wild-type C. difficile 630 strain was indistinguishable to the cbpA knock-out 
strain. To overcome this apparent clostridial adherence redundancy, we 
engineered a Lactococcus lactis strain for the heterologous expression of CbpA. 
When exposed on the surface of L. lactis, CbpA significantly enhances the 
ability of the bacterium to interact with collagen and to adhere to 
ECM-producing cells. The binding activity of L. lactis-CbpA strain was prevented 
by an antiserum raised against CbpA, demonstrating the specificity of the 
interaction. These results suggest that CbpA is a newsurface-exposed adhesin 
contributing to the C. difficile interaction with the host.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cmi.12139
PMID: 23517059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


526. Toxicon. 1988;26(6):583-97. doi: 10.1016/0041-0101(88)90239-5.

Immunochemical and structural similarities in toxin A and toxin B of Clostridium 
difficile shown by binding to monoclonal antibodies.

Rothman SW(1), Gentry MK, Brown JE, Foret DA, Stone MJ, Strickler MP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 
Washington, DC 20307-5100.

Clostridium difficile toxins A and B were shown to share immunochemical and 
structural features, including shared sequential epitopes. Nineteen hybridomas 
generated after immunization of mice with a mixture of toxoids produced 
monoclonal antibodies, all IgM(x), which bound to toxin A and toxin B in a 
solid-phase radioimmunoassay (RIA). None of the antibodies neutralized the 
cytotoxicity of either toxin, alone or in pairs, nor did they neutralize mouse 
lethality. The antibodies did not inhibit hemagglutination by toxin A, and none 
of those tested neutralized the toxin's enterotoxic activity. Studies of binding 
of antibodies to native toxins in the RIA showed that the antibodies differed in 
their recognition of the toxins. Many of the antibodies bound with higher 
avidity to toxin A than to toxin B. In Western blots, all the antibodies 
recognized both toxins in the native state; in addition, some antibodies 
recognized the minor cytotoxic species of toxin B. When the toxins were 
denatured and reduced, five antibodies bound to both toxins, five to A only, and 
nine to neither, demonstrating that the antibodies had different epitope 
specificities. Further structural comparisons were made by investigation of mol. 
wts, subunit structures and amino acid compositions. The native mol. wts of 
toxin A and toxin B, as determined by electrophoresis to equilibrium in 4-30% 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), were 430,000 and 368,000, 
respectively. Denatured and reduced toxins each had a single subunit of 315,000. 
Both toxins had about 50% hydrophobic amino acids.

DOI: 10.1016/0041-0101(88)90239-5
PMID: 2459808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


527. J Clin Microbiol. 2011 May;49(5):1816-21. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00242-11. Epub 2011 
Mar 16.

Evaluation of four different diagnostic tests to detect Clostridium difficile in 
piglets.

Keessen EC(1), Hopman NE, van Leengoed LA, van Asten AJ, Hermanus C, Kuijper EJ, 
Lipman LJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Public Health and Food Safety, Institute for Risk Assessment 
Sciences, Utrecht University, PO Box 80175, 3508 TD Utrecht, Netherlands.

Clostridium difficile is emerging as pathogen in both humans and animals. In 
2000 it was described as one of the causes of neonatal enteritis in piglets, and 
it is now the most common cause of neonatal diarrhea in the United States. In 
Europe, C. difficile infection (CDI) in both neonatal piglets and adult sows has 
also been reported. Diagnosis of this infection is based on detection of the 
bacterium C. difficile or its toxins A and B. Most detection methods, however, 
are only validated for diagnosing human infections. In this study three 
commercially available enzyme immunoassays (EIAs) and a commercial real-time-PCR 
(Becton, Dickinson, and Company) were evaluated by testing 172 pig fecal 
specimens (139 diarrheic and 33 nondiarrheic piglets). The results of each test 
were compared to those of cytotoxicity assays (CTAs) and toxigenic culture as 
the "gold standards." Compared to CTAs, the sensitivity, specificity, positive 
predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) were, respectively, 
as follows: for real-time PCR, 91.6, 37.1, 57.6, and 82.5%; for Premier Toxins 
A&B (Meridian), 83.1, 31.5, 53.1, and 66.7%; for ImmunoCard Toxins A&B kit 
(ICTAB; Meridian), 86.6, 56.8, 66.9, and 80.7%; and for VIDAS (bioMérieux), 
54.8, 92.6, 85.0, and 72.8%. Compared to toxigenic culture, the sensitivity, 
specificity, PPV, and NPV were, respectively, as follows: for real-time PCR, 
93.0, 34.7, 50.0, and 87.5%; for Premier Toxins A&B, 80.3, 27.7, 43.8, and 
66.7%; and for ICTAB, 80.0, 46.2, 52.8, and 75.4%; and for VIDAS, 56.4, 89.8, 
77.5, and 76.7%. We conclude that all tests had an unacceptably low performance 
as a single test for the detection of C. difficile in pig herds and that a 
two-step algorithm is necessary, similar to that in cases of human CDI. Of all 
of the assays, the real-time PCR had the highest NPV compared to both reference 
methods and is therefore the most appropriate test to screen for the absence of 
C. difficile in pigs as a first step in the algorithm. The second step would be 
a confirmation of the positive results by toxigenic culture.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00242-11
PMCID: PMC3122649
PMID: 21411571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


528. Ecohealth. 2018 Mar;15(1):82-95. doi: 10.1007/s10393-018-1313-x. Epub 2018 Feb 
9.

Environmental Factors Associated with the Carriage of Bacterial Pathogens in 
Norway Rats.

Rothenburger JL(1)(2), Himsworth CG(3)(4)(5), Nemeth NM(6)(7), Pearl DL(8), 
Jardine CM(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
50 Stone Road East, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. jamie.rothenburger@gmail.com.
(2)Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative, Ontario Veterinary College, University 
of Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. 
jamie.rothenburger@gmail.com.
(3)School of Population and Public Health, University of British Columbia, 2206 
E Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z9, Canada.
(4)Animal Health Centre, BC Ministry of Agriculture, 1767 Angus Campbell Road, 
Abbotsford, BC, V3G 2M3, Canada.
(5)Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative, 1767 Angus Campbell Road, Abbotsford, 
BC, V3G 2M3, Canada.
(6)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
50 Stone Road East, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada.
(7)Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative, Ontario Veterinary College, University 
of Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada.
(8)Department of Population Medicine, Ontario Veterinary College, University of 
Guelph, 50 Stone Road East, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada.

Worldwide, Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) carry a number of zoonotic pathogens. 
Many studies have identified rat-level risk factors for pathogen carriage. The 
objective of this study was to examine associations between abundance, 
microenvironmental and weather features and Clostridium difficile, 
antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) Escherichia coli and methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) carriage in urban rats. We assessed city blocks for 
rat abundance and 48 microenvironmental variables during a trap-removal study, 
then constructed 32 time-lagged temperature and precipitation variables and 
fitted multivariable logistic regression models. The odds of C. difficile 
positivity were significantly lower when mean maximum temperatures were high 
(≥ 12.89°C) approximately 3 months before rat capture. Alley pavement condition 
was significantly associated with AMR E. coli. Rats captured when precipitation 
was low (< 49.40 mm) in the 15 days before capture and those from blocks that 
contained food gardens and institutions had increased odds of testing positive 
for MRSA. Different factors were associated with each pathogen, which may 
reflect varying pathogen ecology including exposure and environmental survival. 
This study adds to the understanding of how the microenvironment and weather 
impacts the epidemiology and ecology of zoonotic pathogens in urban ecosystems, 
which may be useful for surveillance and control activities.

DOI: 10.1007/s10393-018-1313-x
PMID: 29427247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


529. Front Microbiol. 2018 Jun 19;9:1328. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01328. eCollection 
2018.

Standardized Preparation for Fecal Microbiota Transplantation in Pigs.

Hu J(1)(2)(3), Chen L(1)(2)(3), Tang Y(1)(2)(3), Xie C(1)(2)(3), Xu B(1)(2)(3), 
Shi M(1)(2)(3), Zheng W(1)(2)(3), Zhou S(1)(2)(3), Wang X(1)(2)(3), Liu 
L(1)(2)(3), Yan Y(1)(2)(3), Yang T(1)(2)(3), Niu Y(1)(2)(3), Hou Q(1)(2)(3), Xu 
X(1)(2)(3), Yan X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Animal Sciences 
and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(2)The Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan, 
China.
(3)Hubei Provincial Engineering Laboratory for Pig Precision Feeding and Feed 
Safety Technology, Wuhan, China.

The intestine of pigs harbors a mass of microorganisms which are essential for 
intestinal homeostasis and host health. Intestinal microbial disorders induce 
enteric inflammation and metabolic dysfunction, thereby causing adverse effects 
on the growth and health of pigs. In the human medicine, fecal microbiota 
transplantation (FMT), which engrafts the fecal microbiota from a healthy donor 
into a patient recipient, has shown efficacy in intestinal microbiota 
restoration. In addition, it has been used widely in therapy for human 
gastrointestinal diseases, including Clostridium difficile infection, 
inflammatory bowel diseases, and irritable bowel syndrome. Given that pigs share 
many similarities with humans, in terms of anatomy, nutritional physiology, and 
intestinal microbial compositions, FMT may also be used to restore the normal 
intestinal microbiota of pigs. However, feasible procedures for performing FMT 
in pigs remains unclear. Here, we summarize a standardized preparation for FMT 
in pigs by combining the standard methodology for human FMT with pig production. 
The key issues include the donor selection, fecal material preparation, fecal 
material transfer, stool bank establishment, and the safety for porcine FMT. 
Optimal donors should be selected to ensure the efficacy of porcine FMT and 
reduce the risks of transmitting infectious diseases to recipients during FMT. 
Preparing for fresh fecal material is highly recommended. Alternatively, frozen 
fecal suspension can also be prepared as an optimal choice because it is 
convenient and has similar efficacy. Oral administration of fecal suspension 
could be an optimal method for porcine fecal material transfer. Furthermore, the 
dilution ratio of fecal materials and the frequency of fecal material transfer 
could be adjusted according to practical situations in the pig industry. To meet 
the potential large-scale requirement in the pig industry, it is important to 
establish a stool bank to make porcine FMT readily available. Future studies 
should also focus on providing more robust safety data on FMT to improve the 
safety and tolerability of the recipient pigs. This standardized preparation for 
porcine FMT can facilitate the development of microbial targeted therapies and 
improve the intestinal health of pigs.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01328
PMCID: PMC6018536
PMID: 29971061


530. FEBS Lett. 1989 Sep 11;255(1):175-8. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(89)81085-3.

Presence of fructokinase in pancreatic islets.

Malaisse WJ(1), Malaisse-Lagae F, Davies DR, Van Schaftingen E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, Brussels Free University, Belgium.

Homogenates of rat pancreatic islets that had been heated for 5 min at 70 
degrees C to inactive hexokinases, catalyzed the ATP-dependent phosphorylation 
of D-fructose. This reaction was dependent on the presence of K+ and was 
inhibited by D-tagatose although not by D-glucose or D-glucose 6-phosphate. The 
phosphorylation product was identified as fructose 1-phosphate through its 
conversion to a bisphosphate ester by Clostridium difficile fructose 1-phosphate 
kinase. These findings allowed the conclusion that fructokinase (ketohexokinase) 
was responsible for this process. Similar results were observed with tumoral 
insulin-producing cells (RINm5F line). Fructokinase may account for a large 
share of fructose phosphorylation in intact islets, particularly in the presence 
of D-glucose.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(89)81085-3
PMID: 2551726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


531. Peptides. 2001 Sep;22(9):1439-46. doi: 10.1016/s0196-9781(01)00463-6.

The capsaicin VR1 receptor mediates substance P release in toxin A-induced 
enteritis in rats.

McVey DC(1), Vigna SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Box 3709, Duke University Medical Center and 
Durham V. A. Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The mechanism by which Clostridium difficile toxin A causes substance P (SP) 
release and subsequent inflammation in the rat ileum is unknown. Pretreatment 
with the vanilloid receptor subtype 1 (VR1) antagonist, capsazepine, before 
toxin A administration significantly inhibited toxin A-induced SP release and 
intestinal inflammation. Intraluminal administration of the VR1 agonist 
capsaicin caused intestinal inflammation similar to the effects of toxin A. 
Pretreatment with capsazepine before capsaicin administration also significantly 
inhibited capsaicin-induced intestinal inflammation. These results suggest that 
intraluminal toxin A causes SP release from primary sensory neurons via 
stimulation of VR1 receptors resulting in intestinal inflammation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0196-9781(01)00463-6
PMID: 11514026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


532. Vaccine. 2012 Jun 13;30(28):4249-58. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.04.045. Epub 
2012 Apr 23.

A novel fusion protein containing the receptor binding domains of C. difficile 
toxin A and toxin B elicits protective immunity against lethal toxin and spore 
challenge in preclinical efficacy models.

Tian JH(1), Fuhrmann SR, Kluepfel-Stahl S, Carman RJ, Ellingsworth L, Flyer DC.

Author information:
(1)Intercell, USA, 22 Firstfield Road, Gaithersburg, MD 20878, USA.

Antibodies targeting the Clostridium difficile toxin A and toxin B confer 
protective immunity to C. difficile associated disease in animal models and 
provided protection against recurrent C. difficile disease in human subjects. 
These antibodies are directed against the receptor binding domains (RBD) located 
in the carboxy-terminal portion of both toxins and inhibit binding of the toxins 
to their receptors. We have constructed a recombinant fusion protein containing 
portions of the RBD from both toxin A and toxin B and expressed it in 
Escherichia coli. The fusion protein induced high levels of serum antibodies to 
both toxins A and B capable of neutralizing toxin activity both in vitro and in 
vivo. In a hamster C. difficile infection model, immunization with the fusion 
protein reduced disease severity and conferred significant protection against a 
lethal dose of C. difficile spores. Our studies demonstrate the potential of the 
fusion protein as a vaccine that could provide protection from C. difficile 
disease in humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.04.045
PMID: 22537987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


533. Rev Infect Dis. 1984 Mar-Apr;6 Suppl 1:S214-21. doi: 
10.1093/clinids/6.supplement_1.s214.

Inciting and etiologic agents of colitis.

Silva J, Fekety R, Werk C, Ebright J, Cudmore M, Batts D, Syrjamaki C, Lukens J.

Since 1979, 3,115 stool samples were tested for detection of Clostridium 
difficile and its cytotoxin; these were obtained from patients who had 
drug-related diarrhea. Presumed or proven colitis due to C. difficile was 
diagnosed in 130 patients. Drugs implicated most commonly as causing or 
associated with the onset of enterocolitis due to C. difficile were ampicillin 
(38 episodes), cephalosporins (71), clindamycin (36), and the aminoglycosides 
(45). The hamster model of colitis was employed to explore the role of other 
inducing agents. Altering the usual diet of hamsters to one with a higher 
protein content decreased the time to death due to C. difficile cecitis 
following the administration of cefazolin (10 mg). Several cathartics also were 
studied for their effect on the lethality of antibiotic-induced cecitis. Daily 
administrations of castor oil (0.5 ml per day) and vegetable oil (1.0 ml per 
day) improved survival against lethal doses of clindamycin. Milk of magnesia or 
mineral oil provided no protection. Four patients with C. difficile colitis 
induced by therapy with cytotoxic drugs also were identified. Methotrexate 
induced cecitis when administered orally and daily to hamsters, and C. difficile 
and its cytotoxin were identified in the hamsters' stools. Death due to 
methotrexate-induced cecitis was prevented by daily administration of folinic 
acid or vancomycin. These data demonstrate that a variety of antibiotics, 
antineoplastic agents, cathartics, and diet changes can induce C. difficile 
colitis in humans and hamsters.

DOI: 10.1093/clinids/6.supplement_1.s214
PMID: 6718935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


534. Environ Microbiol. 2018 Apr;20(4):1419-1435. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14048. Epub 
2018 Feb 9.

Ethanolamine is a valuable nutrient source that impacts Clostridium difficile 
pathogenesis.

Nawrocki KL(1), Wetzel D(1), Jones JB(1), Woods EC(1), McBride SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, and Emory Antibiotic Resistance 
Center, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Clostridium (Clostridioides) difficile is a gastrointestinal pathogen that 
colonizes the intestinal tract of mammals and can cause severe diarrheal 
disease. Although C. difficile growth is confined to the intestinal tract, our 
understanding of the specific metabolites and host factors that are important 
for the growth of the bacterium is limited. In other enteric pathogens, the 
membrane-derived metabolite, ethanolamine (EA), is utilized as a nutrient source 
and can function as a signal to initiate the production of virulence factors. In 
this study, we investigated the effects of ethanolamine and the role of the 
predicted ethanolamine gene cluster (CD1907-CD1925) on C. difficile growth. 
Using targeted mutagenesis, we disrupted genes within the eut cluster and 
assessed their roles in ethanolamine utilization, and the impact of eut 
disruption on the outcome of infection in a hamster model of disease. Our 
results indicate that the eut gene cluster is required for the growth of C. 
difficile on ethanolamine as a primary nutrient source. Further, the inability 
to utilize ethanolamine resulted in greater virulence and a shorter time to 
morbidity in the animal model. Overall, these data suggest that ethanolamine is 
an important nutrient source within the host and that, in contrast to other 
intestinal pathogens, the metabolism of ethanolamine by C. difficile can delay 
the onset of disease.

© 2018 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.14048
PMCID: PMC5903940
PMID: 29349925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.


535. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1984 Oct;26(4):552-6. doi: 10.1128/aac.26.4.552.

Prevention of clindamycin-induced mortality in hamsters by Saccharomyces 
boulardii.

Toothaker RD, Elmer GW.

Saccharomyces boulardii, a yeast used in a number of countries for general and 
antibiotic-associated gastrointestinal illnesses, was examined for possible 
application in the prevention of clindamycin-induced mortality in the hamster 
colitis model. Hamsters were given free access to an aqueous 5% suspension of 
lyophilized yeast for 3 days before and 10 days after administration of a single 
oral clindamycin dose of from 0.2 to 0.8 mg/kg. Mortality was recorded in groups 
of 7 to 20 animals every 24 h for 10 to 30 days. Mean cecal concentrations of S. 
boulardii were greater than 10(6) CFU/ml throughout the yeast administration 
period. Yeast treatment significantly decreased cumulative percent mortality by 
an average of 29%. Death onset was not affected by yeast treatment. Cecitis was 
present in 86% of moribund animals (N = 95) and was absent in all surviving 
animals examined (N = 27). Toxigenic Clostridium difficile was isolated from 13 
of 14 moribund hamsters examined. No adverse effects of the yeast treatment were 
observed in animals receiving S. boulardii without clindamycin. The results 
suggest that S. boulardii warrants further evaluation for the prevention of 
antibiotic-associated colitis.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.26.4.552
PMCID: PMC179962
PMID: 6517545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


536. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012 Oct;107(10):1452-9. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2012.93.

The microbiome and inflammatory bowel disease: is there a therapeutic role for 
fecal microbiota transplantation?

Damman CJ(1), Miller SI, Surawicz CM, Zisman TL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. cjdamman@uw.edu

One hypothesis for the etiology of inflammatory bowel disease is that an altered 
or pathogenic microbiota causes inflammation in a genetically susceptible 
individual. Understanding the microbiota's role in the pathogenesis of the 
disease could lead to new IBD treatments aimed at shifting the bacteria in the 
gut back to eubiosis. Probiotics have some efficacy in the treatment of 
ulcerative colitis (UC), but our current repertoire is limited in potency. Fecal 
microbiota therapy (FMT) is an emerging treatment for several gastrointestinal 
and metabolic disorders. It has demonstrated efficacy in treating refractory 
Clostridium difficile infection, and there are case reports of FMT successfully 
treating UC. Further clinical studies are justified, and could be complemented 
by mouse models of fecal transplantation, in which variables can be controlled 
and manipulated.

DOI: 10.1038/ajg.2012.93
PMID: 23034604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


537. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2009 Jan;53(1):223-8. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01442-07. 
Epub 2008 Oct 27.

Clinical outcomes, safety, and pharmacokinetics of OPT-80 in a phase 2 trial 
with patients with Clostridium difficile infection.

Louie T(1), Miller M, Donskey C, Mullane K, Goldstein EJ.

Author information:
(1)University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. louie@ucalgary.ca

OPT-80, a novel, minimally absorbed macrocycle, is a candidate treatment option 
for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) based on cure without recurrence of 
CDI in the hamster challenge model, good in vitro activity against C. difficile, 
and relative sparing of commensal gram-negative anaerobes. In this open-label, 
dose-ranging clinical trial, 48 evaluable subjects were randomized to receive 
either 50, 100, or 200 mg of OPT-80 orally every 12 h for 10 days as treatment 
for mild to moderately severe CDI. OPT-80 was well tolerated by all subjects. 
Plasma concentrations were below the lower limit of quantitation in almost 
one-half of patients and typically <or=20 ng/ml across the dose range; the mean 
fecal concentrations exceeded the MIC at which 90% of the isolates tested are 
inhibited by 2,000- to 10,000-fold with increasing dosages. Resolution of 
diarrhea within 10 days was achieved in 10/14 patients (71%), 12/15 patients 
(80%), and 15/16 patients (94%), and the median time to resolution of diarrhea 
was reduced from 5.5 to 3.0 days with increasing dosages. Across all groups, the 
clinical cure rate, which was defined as resolution of diarrheal disease without 
the need for further treatment, was 41/45 patients (91%). Recurrence of CDI at 
approximately 1 month after treatment was observed in two (5%) patients, one 
each in the 100-mg and 400-mg groups. The apparent high clinical response, good 
tolerance, low recurrence rate, and more-complete and rapid symptom control with 
the highest dosage support the selection of the 200-mg twice-daily dose for 
further clinical development of OPT-80 for treatment of CDI.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01442-07
PMCID: PMC2612138
PMID: 18955525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


538. mBio. 2015 Mar 24;6(2):e02368-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02368-14.

A modified R-type bacteriocin specifically targeting Clostridium difficile 
prevents colonization of mice without affecting gut microbiota diversity.

Gebhart D(1), Lok S(1), Clare S(2), Tomas M, Stares M(3), Scholl D(1), Donskey 
CJ, Lawley TD(3), Govoni GR(4).

Author information:
(1)AvidBiotics Corp., South San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Microbial Pathogenesis Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Host Microbiota Interactions Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 
Hinxton, United Kingdome.
(4)AvidBiotics Corp., South San Francisco, California, USA greg@avidbiotics.com.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2015 May;13(5):250.

Clostridium difficile is a leading cause of nosocomial infections worldwide and 
has become an urgent public health threat requiring immediate attention. 
Epidemic lineages of the BI/NAP1/027 strain type have emerged and spread through 
health care systems across the globe over the past decade. Limiting 
person-to-person transmission and eradicating C. difficile, especially the 
BI/NAP1/027 strain type, from health care facilities are difficult due to the 
abundant shedding of spores that are impervious to most interventions. Effective 
prophylaxis for C. difficile infection (CDI) is lacking. We have genetically 
modified a contractile R-type bacteriocin ("diffocin") from C. difficile strain 
CD4 to kill BI/NAP1/027-type strains for this purpose. The natural receptor 
binding protein (RBP) responsible for diffocin targeting was replaced with a 
newly discovered RBP identified within a prophage of a BI/NAP1/027-type target 
strain by genome mining. The resulting modified diffocins (a.k.a. Avidocin-CDs), 
Av-CD291.1 and Av-CD291.2, were stable and killed all 16 tested BI/NAP1/027-type 
strains. Av-CD291.2 administered in drinking water survived passage through the 
mouse gastrointestinal (GI) tract, did not detectably alter the mouse gut 
microbiota or disrupt natural colonization resistance to C. difficile or the 
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VREF), and prevented 
antibiotic-induced colonization of mice inoculated with BI/NAP1/027-type spores. 
Given the high incidence and virulence of the pathogen, preventing colonization 
by BI/NAP1/027-type strains and limiting their transmission could significantly 
reduce the occurrence of the most severe CDIs. This modified diffocin represents 
a prototype of an Avidocin-CD platform capable of producing targetable, 
precision anti-C. difficile agents that can prevent and potentially treat CDIs 
without disrupting protective indigenous microbiota.
IMPORTANCE: Treatment and prevention strategies for bacterial diseases rely 
heavily on traditional antibiotics, which impose strong selection for resistance 
and disrupt protective microbiota. One consequence has been an upsurge of 
opportunistic pathogens, such as Clostridium difficile, that exploit 
antibiotic-induced disruptions in gut microbiota to proliferate and cause 
life-threatening diseases. We have developed alternative agents that utilize 
contractile bactericidal protein complexes (R-type bacteriocins) to kill 
specific C. difficile pathogens. Efficacy in a preclinical animal study 
indicates these molecules warrant further development as potential prophylactic 
agents to prevent C. difficile infections in humans. Since these agents do not 
detectably alter the indigenous gut microbiota or colonization resistance in 
mice, we believe they will be safe to administer as a prophylactic to block 
transmission in high-risk environments without rendering patients susceptible to 
enteric infection after cessation of treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Gebhart et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02368-14
PMCID: PMC4453579
PMID: 25805733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


539. Int J Toxicol. 2016 May;35(3):309-16. doi: 10.1177/1091581815623236. Epub 2015 
Dec 23.

Nonclinical Safety Assessment of SYN-004: An Oral β-lactamase for the Protection 
of the Gut Microbiome From Disruption by Biliary-Excreted, Intravenously 
Administered Antibiotics.

Kokai-Kun JF(1), Bristol JA(2), Setser J(3), Schlosser M(4).

Author information:
(1)Synthetic Biologics, Inc, Rockville, MD, USA 
jkokai-kun@syntheticbiologics.com.
(2)Synthetic Biologics, Inc, Rockville, MD, USA.
(3)WIL Research, Ashland, OH, USA.
(4)MSR Pharma Services, Inc, Lincolnshire, IL, USA.

SYN-004 is a first in class, recombinant β-lactamase that degrades β-lactam 
antibiotics and has been formulated to be administered orally to patients 
receiving intravenous β-lactam antibiotics including cephalosporins. SYN-004 is 
intended to degrade unmetabolized antibiotics excreted into the intestines and 
thus has the potential to protect the gut microbiome from disruption by these 
antibiotics. Protection of the gut microbiome is expected to protect against 
opportunistic enteric infections such as Clostridium difficile infection as well 
as antibiotic-associated diarrhea. In order to demonstrate that oral SYN-004 is 
safe for human clinical trials, 2 Good Laboratory Practice-compliant toxicity 
studies were conducted in Beagle dogs. In both studies, SYN-004 was administered 
orally 3 times per day up to the maximum tolerated dose of the formulation. In 
the first study, doses of SYN-004 administered over 28 days were safe and well 
tolerated in dogs with the no-observed-adverse-effect level at the high dose of 
57 mg/kg/day. Systemic absorption of SYN-004 was minimal and sporadic and showed 
no accumulation during the study. In the second study, doses up to 57 mg/kg/day 
were administered to dogs in combination with an intravenous dose of ceftriaxone 
(300 mg/kg) given once per day for 14 days. Coadministration of oral SYN-004 
with intravenous ceftriaxone was safe and well tolerated, with SYN-004 having no 
noticeable effect on the plasma pharmacokinetics of ceftriaxone. These 
preclinical studies demonstrate that SYN-004 is well tolerated and, when 
coadministered with ceftriaxone, does not interfere with its systemic 
pharmacokinetics. These data supported advancing SYN-004 into human clinical 
trials.

© The Author(s) 2015.

DOI: 10.1177/1091581815623236
PMID: 26700136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


540. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1985 Nov;28(5):660-2. doi: 10.1128/aac.28.5.660.

Antimicrobial activity of aridicins, novel glycopeptide antibiotics with high 
and prolonged levels in blood.

Grappel SF, Giovenella AJ, Phillips L, Pitkin DH, Nisbet LJ.

Three new glycopeptide antibiotics, aridicins A, B, and C, produced by 
Kibdelosporangium aridum have a spectrum of antimicrobial activity in vitro 
which is similar to that of vancomycin. The antimicrobial activities of these 
glycopeptides against clinical bacterial isolates were compared with those of 
vancomycin and other related glycopeptide antibiotics in vitro by agar dilution 
and microtiter broth dilution tests and in vivo in mouse protection studies. In 
vitro they were somewhat less effective than vancomycin against strains of 
Staphylococcus aureus and less active against coagulase-negative Staphylococcus 
spp. However, they were more active than vancomycin against strains of 
Streptococcus faecalis and markedly superior to vancomycin and other 
glycopeptide antibiotics against strains of Clostridium difficile. In 
experimental infections, aridicin A was effective against strains of S. aureus, 
S. epidermidis, Streptococcus faecalis, and Streptococcus pyogenes, although its 
50% effective doses were higher than those of vancomycin when administered after 
infection. After subcutaneous administration, aridicin A had a higher peak level 
in serum and a longer half-life than vancomycin or teicoplanin. The aridicins 
were markedly superior to vancomycin when administered prior to infection in 
mouse protection tests, indicating long-acting potential.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.28.5.660
PMCID: PMC176352
PMID: 3937489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


541. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2018 Apr 26;62(5):e02237-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.02237-17. Print 2018 May.

Tapering Courses of Oral Vancomycin Induce Persistent Disruption of the 
Microbiota That Provide Colonization Resistance to Clostridium difficile and 
Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci in Mice.

Tomas ME(1), Mana TSC(2), Wilson BM(1)(2), Nerandzic MM(2), Joussef-Piña S(3), 
Quiñones-Mateu ME(3)(4), Donskey CJ(5)(4).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Cleveland Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Research Service, Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(3)Departments of Pathology and Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(5)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Cleveland Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA curtis.donskey@va.gov.

Vancomycin taper regimens are commonly used for the treatment of recurrent 
Clostridium difficile infections. One rationale for tapering and pulsing of the 
dose at the end of therapy is to reduce the selective pressure of vancomycin on 
the indigenous intestinal microbiota. Here, we used a mouse model to test the 
hypothesis that the indigenous microbiota that provide colonization resistance 
against C. difficile and vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) is repopulated 
during tapering courses of vancomycin. Mice were treated orally with vancomycin 
daily for 10 days, vancomycin in a tapering dose for 42 days, fidaxomicin for 10 
days, or saline. To assess colonization resistance, subsets of mice were 
challenged with 104 CFU of C. difficile or VRE at multiple time points during 
and after completion of treatment. The impact of the treatments on the 
microbiome was measured by cultures, real-time PCR for selected anaerobic 
bacteria, and deep sequencing. Vancomycin taper-treated mice developed 
alterations of the microbiota and disruption of colonization resistance that was 
persistent 18 days after treatment. In contrast, mice treated with a 10-day 
course of vancomycin exhibited recovery of the microbiota and of colonization 
resistance by 15 days after treatment, and fidaxomicin-treated mice maintained 
intact colonization resistance. These findings demonstrate that alteration of 
the indigenous microbiota responsible for colonization resistance to C. 
difficile and VRE persist during and after completion of tapering courses of 
vancomycin.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02237-17
PMCID: PMC5923165
PMID: 29530853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


542. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Jul 14;12(7):e1005758. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005758. 
eCollection 2016 Jul.

CdtR Regulates TcdA and TcdB Production in Clostridium difficile.

Lyon SA(1), Hutton ML(1), Rood JI(1), Cheung JK(1), Lyras D(1).

Author information:
(1)Infection and Immunity Program, Biomedicine Discovery Institute and 
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Clostridium difficile is a global health burden and the leading cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea worldwide, causing severe gastrointestinal 
disease and death. Three well characterised toxins are encoded by this bacterium 
in two genetic loci, specifically, TcdB (toxin B) and TcdA (toxin A) in the 
Pathogenicity Locus (PaLoc) and binary toxin (CDT) in the genomically distinct 
CDT locus (CdtLoc). Toxin production is controlled by regulators specific to 
each locus. The orphan response regulator, CdtR, encoded within the CdtLoc, 
up-regulates CDT production. Until now there has been no suggestion that CdtR 
influences TcdA and TcdB production since it is not carried by all 
PaLoc-containing strains and CdtLoc is not linked genetically to PaLoc. Here we 
show that, in addition to CDT, CdtR regulates TcdA and TcdB production but that 
this effect is strain dependent. Of clinical relevance, CdtR increased the 
production of TcdA, TcdB and CDT in two epidemic ribotype 027 human strains, 
modulating their virulence in a mouse infection model. Strains traditionally 
from animal lineages, notably ribotype 078 strains, are increasingly being 
isolated from humans and their genetic and phenotypic analysis is critical for 
future studies on this important pathogen. Here we show that CdtR-mediated toxin 
regulation did not occur in other strain backgrounds, including a ribotype 078 
animal strain. The finding that toxin gene regulation is strain dependent 
highlights the regulatory diversity between C. difficile isolates and the 
importance of studying virulence regulation in diverse lineages and clinically 
relevant strains. Our work provides the first evidence that TcdA, TcdB and CDT 
production is linked by a common regulatory mechanism and that CdtR may act as a 
global regulator of virulence in epidemic 027 strains.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005758
PMCID: PMC4944984
PMID: 27414650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


543. Pathog Immun. 2019 Nov 14;4(2):271-293. doi: 10.20411/pai.v4i2.335. eCollection 
2019.

Urinary Metabolites of Green Tea as Potential Markers of Colonization Resistance 
to Pathogenic Gut Bacteria in Mice.

Obrenovich ME(1)(2)(3)(4), Jaskiw GE(5)(6), Mana TSC(2)(6), Bennett CP(2), 
Cadnum J(2), Donskey CJ(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Service; Veterans Affairs Northeast Ohio 
Healthcare System (VANEOHS); Cleveland, Ohio.
(2)Research Service; VANEOHS; Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Department of Chemistry; Case Western Reserve University; Cleveland, Ohio.
(4)Department of Medicinal and Biological Chemistry; University of Toledo; 
Toledo, Ohio.
(5)Psychiatry Service; VANEOHS; Cleveland, Ohio.
(6)School of Medicine; Case Western Reserve University; Cleveland, Ohio.
(7)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center; VANEOHS; Cleveland, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: The gut microbiome (GMB) generates numerous chemicals that are 
absorbed systemically and excreted in urine. Antibiotics can disrupt the GMB 
ecosystem and weaken its resistance to colonization by enteric pathogens such as 
Clostridium difficile. If the changes in GMB composition and metabolism are 
sufficiently large, they can be reflected in the urinary metabo-lome. 
Characterizing these changes could provide a potentially valuable biomarker of 
the status of the GMB. While preliminary studies suggest such a possibility, the 
high level of data variance presents a challenge to translational applications. 
Since many GMB-generated chemicals are derived from the biotransformation of 
plant-derived dietary polyphenols, administering an oral precursor challenge 
should amplify GMB-dependent changes in urinary metabolites.
METHODS: A course of antibiotics (clindamycin, piperacillin/tazobactam, or 
aztreonam) was administered SC daily (days 1 and 2) to mice receiving 
polyphenol-rich green tea in drinking water. Urine was collected at baseline as 
well as days 3, 7, and 11. Levels of pyrogallol and pyrocatechol, two phenolic 
molecules unequivocally GMB-dependent in humans but that had not been similarly 
examined in mice, were quantified.
RESULTS: In confirmation of our hypothesis, differential changes in murine 
urinary pyrogallol levels identified the treatments (clindamycin, 
piperacillin/tazobactam) previously associated with a weakening of colonization 
resistance to Clostridium difficile. The changes in pyrocatechol levels did not 
withstand corrections for multiple comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: In the mouse, urinary pyrogallol and, in all likelihood, 
pyrocatechol levels, are GMB-dependent and, in combination with precursor 
challenge, deserve further consideration as potential metabolomic biomarkers for 
the health and dysbiotic vulnerability of the GMB.

© Pathogens and Immunity 2019.

DOI: 10.20411/pai.v4i2.335
PMCID: PMC6863553
PMID: 31773068

Conflict of interest statement: Curtis J. Donskey has received research funding 
from Clorox, GOJO, Pfizer, Avery Dennison, PDI, and Boehringer Laboratories. He 
also serves as an associate editor for Pathogens and Immunity. All other authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest.


544. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Dec;59(12):7447-57. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01357-15. 
Epub 2015 Sep 21.

Using a Novel Lysin To Help Control Clostridium difficile Infections.

Wang Q(1), Euler CW(2), Delaune A(1), Fischetti VA(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Bacterial Pathogenesis and Immunology, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Bacterial Pathogenesis and Immunology, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, New York, USA Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, 
Hunter College, CUNY, New York, New York, USA Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Bacterial Pathogenesis and Immunology, The Rockefeller 
University, New York, New York, USA vaf@rockefeller.edu.

As a consequence of excessive antibiotic therapies in hospitalized patients, 
Clostridium difficile, a Gram-positive anaerobic spore-forming intestinal 
pathogen, is the leading cause of hospital-acquired diarrhea and colitis. Drug 
treatments for these diseases are often complicated by antibiotic-resistant 
strains and a high frequency of treatment failures and relapse; therefore, novel 
nonantibiotic approaches may prove to be more effective. In this study, we 
recombinantly expressed a prophage lysin identified from a C. difficile strain, 
CD630, which we named PlyCD. PlyCD was found to have lytic activity against 
specific C. difficile strains. However, the recombinantly expressed catalytic 
domain of this protein, PlyCD1-174, displayed significantly greater lytic 
activity (>4-log kill) and a broader lytic spectrum against C. difficile strains 
while still retaining a high degree of specificity toward C. difficile versus 
commensal clostridia and other bacterial species. Our data also indicated that 
noneffective doses of vancomycin and PlyCD1-174 when combined in vitro could be 
significantly more bactericidal against C. difficile. In an ex vivo treatment 
model of mouse colon infection, we found that PlyCD1-174 functioned in the 
presence of intestinal contents, significantly decreasing colonizing C. 
difficile compared to controls. Together, these data suggest that PlyCD1-174 has 
potential as a novel therapeutic for clinical application against C. difficile 
infection, either alone or in combination with other preexisting treatments to 
improve their efficacy.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01357-15
PMCID: PMC4649177
PMID: 26392484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


545. Microbiome. 2015 Aug 20;3:35. doi: 10.1186/s40168-015-0097-2.

Humanized microbiota mice as a model of recurrent Clostridium difficile disease.

Collins J(1), Auchtung JM(2), Schaefer L(3), Eaton KA(4), Britton RA(5).

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular Virology and 
Microbiology, Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research, Houston, 
TX, USA. James.collins@bcm.edu.
(2)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular Virology and 
Microbiology, Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research, Houston, 
TX, USA. Jennifer.Auchtung@bcm.edu.
(3)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular Virology and 
Microbiology, Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research, Houston, 
TX, USA. laura.schaefer2@bcm.edu.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA. kateaton@umich.edu.
(5)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular Virology and 
Microbiology, Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research, Houston, 
TX, USA. Robert.Britton@bcm.edu.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile disease is the leading antibiotic-associated 
cause of diarrhea and nosocomial acquired infection in the western world. The 
per annum burden in the USA alone amounts to 250,000 cases with 14,000 ascribed 
deaths and medical costs in excess of a billion dollars. Novel models for the 
study of C. difficile infection are therefore pertinent.
RESULTS: Germ free C57BL/6 mice gavaged with a healthy human fecal microbiota 
maintained a stable "humanized" microbiota over multiple generations when housed 
under specific pathogen-free (SPF) conditions. As with mice containing a 
conventional microbiota, treatment with a five-antibiotic cocktail followed by a 
single dose of clindamycin renders the animals susceptible to C. difficile 
infection (CDI). Interestingly, after recovery from the initial CDI infection, a 
single intraperitoneal injection of clindamycin is sufficient to induce CDI 
relapse. Relapse of CDI can be induced up to 35 days postinfection after 
recovery from the initial infection, and multiple episodes of relapse can be 
induced.
CONCLUSIONS: This model enables the study of recurrent C. difficile disease in a 
host containing a human-derived microbiota. Probiotic treatments using 
human-derived microbes, either prophylactic or curative, can be tested within 
the model. The identification and testing of human-derived microbial communities 
within a humanized microbiota mouse model may enable a higher rate of successful 
transfer of bacteria-based treatments from the lab to human patients due to the 
microbes involved initiating from, and being adapted to, the human GI tract.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-015-0097-2
PMCID: PMC4546040
PMID: 26289776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


546. J Med Microbiol. 1992 Mar;36(3):190-7. doi: 10.1099/00222615-36-3-190.

A non-haemagglutinating form of Clostridium difficile toxin A.

Kamiya S(1), Borriello SP.

Author information:
(1)Microbial Pathogenicity Research Group, MRC Clinical Research Centre, Harrow, 
Middlesex.

Analysis of crude culture filtrate of Clostridium difficile by Mono Q-anion 
exchange fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) demonstrated that toxin A had 
distinct peaks of activity for cytotoxicity and haemagglutination, as also did 
highly purified toxin A obtained by thyroglobulin affinity chromatography (TG) 
followed by two sequential anion-exchange chromatographic steps with Q-Sepharose 
FF and Mono Q. From TG unbound fractions a highly cytotoxic but weakly 
haemagglutinating variant (toxin A') of toxin A was obtained by Q-Sepharose FF 
and Mono Q chromatography. Analysis of toxins A and A' from cultures of C. 
difficile in a chemically defined medium, and of toxin A dialysed against brain 
heart infusion broth, indicated that A' was not merely toxin A coupled to a 
component of the growth medium. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis under 
non-denaturing conditions showed that toxins A and A' had the same Mr. 
Immunoblotting with mouse monospecific A antitoxin showed that five bands larger 
than the major 240-Kda band were more strongly developed in toxin A than in A' 
in denaturing but non-reducing conditions, and in reducing conditions eight 
bands (38-175 Kda) were seen in toxin A but not A'. Immunoblotting with a 
monoclonal antibody (PCG-4) showed that, in both reducing and non-reducing 
conditions, two bands of 160 and 155 Kda were more prominent in toxins A and A' 
respectively, and four bands (195, 180, 175 and 125 Kda) were detected only in 
toxin A'.

DOI: 10.1099/00222615-36-3-190
PMID: 1548692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


547. Nat Microbiol. 2020 Apr;5(4):642-650. doi: 10.1038/s41564-020-0668-2. Epub 2020 
Feb 10.

Diarrhoeal events can trigger long-term Clostridium difficile colonization with 
recurrent blooms.

VanInsberghe D(1), Elsherbini JA(1), Varian B(2), Poutahidis T(2)(3), Erdman 
S(2), Polz MF(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(2)The Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Aristotle 
University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(4)The Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. mpolz@mit.edu.
(5)Division of Microbial Ecology, Center for Microbiology and Environmental 
Systems Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. mpolz@mit.edu.

Although Clostridium difficile is widely considered an antibiotic- and 
hospital-associated pathogen, recent evidence indicates that this is an 
insufficient depiction of the risks and reservoirs. A common thread that links 
all major risk factors of infection is their association with gastrointestinal 
disturbances, but this relationship to C. difficile colonization has never been 
tested directly. Here, we show that disturbances caused by diarrhoeal events 
trigger susceptibility to C. difficile colonization. Using survey data of the 
human gut microbiome, we detected C. difficile colonization and blooms in people 
recovering from food poisoning and Vibrio cholerae infections. Carriers remained 
colonized for year-long time scales and experienced highly variable patterns of 
C. difficile abundance, where increased shedding over short periods of 1-2 d 
interrupted week-long periods in which C. difficile was undetectable. Given that 
short shedding events were often linked to gastrointestinal disturbances, our 
results help explain why C. difficile is frequently detected as a co-infecting 
pathogen in patients with diarrhoea. To directly test the impact of diarrhoea on 
susceptibility to colonization, we developed a mouse model of variable 
disturbance intensity, which allowed us to monitor colonization in the absence 
of disease. As mice exposed to avirulent C. difficile spores ingested increasing 
quantities of laxatives, more individuals experienced C. difficile blooms. Our 
results indicate that the likelihood of colonization is highest in the days 
immediately following acute disturbances, suggesting that this could be an 
important window during which transmission could be interrupted and the 
incidence of infection lowered.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-020-0668-2
PMID: 32042128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


548. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009 Feb;87(2):169-80. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0415-2. Epub 
2008 Nov 5.

Clostridium difficile toxin A promotes dendritic cell maturation and chemokine 
CXCL2 expression through p38, IKK, and the NF-kappaB signaling pathway.

Lee JY(1), Kim H, Cha MY, Park HG, Kim YJ, Kim IY, Kim JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Hanyang University College of Medicine, 17 
Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul, 133-791, South Korea.

Clostridium difficile toxin A causes acute colitis associated with intense 
infiltrating neutrophils. Although dendritic cells (DCs) play an important role 
in the regulation of inflammation, little is known about the effects of toxin A 
on the maturation and neutrophil-attracting chemokine expression in DCs. This 
study investigated whether C. difficile toxin A could influence the maturation 
of mouse bone-marrow-derived DCs and chemokine CXCL2 expression. Toxin A 
increased the DC maturation which was closely related to CXCL2 upregulation. 
Concurrently, toxin A activated the signals of p65/p50 nuclear factor kappa B 
(NF-kappaB) heterodimers and phospho-I kappa B kinase (IKK) in DCs. The 
increased DC maturation, CXCL2 expression, and neutrophil chemoattraction were 
significantly downregulated in the NF-kappaB knockout mice. In addition, toxin A 
activated the phosphorylated signals of mitogen-activated protein kinases 
(MAPKs), such as ERK, p38, and JNK. Of all three MAPK signals, p38 MAPK was 
significantly related to DC maturation. Thus, suppression of p38 activity using 
SB203580 and siRNA transfection resulted in the significant reduction of IKK 
activity, DC maturation, and CXCL2 upregulation by toxin A. These results 
suggest that p38 MAPK may lead to the activation of IKK and NF-kappaB signaling, 
resulting in enhanced DC maturation and CXCL2 expression in response to C. 
difficile toxin A stimulation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-008-0415-2
PMID: 18985311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


549. J Clin Invest. 2000 Apr;105(8):1147-56. doi: 10.1172/JCI7545.

p38 MAP kinase activation by Clostridium difficile toxin A mediates monocyte 
necrosis, IL-8 production, and enteritis.

Warny M(1), Keates AC, Keates S, Castagliuolo I, Zacks JK, Aboudola S, Qamar A, 
Pothoulakis C, LaMont JT, Kelly CP.

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. mwarny@caregroup.havard.edu

Clostridium difficile toxin A causes acute neutrophil infiltration and 
intestinal mucosal injury. In cultured cells, toxin A inactivates Rho proteins 
by monoglucosylation. In monocytes, toxin A induces IL-8 production and necrosis 
by unknown mechanisms. We investigated the role of mitogen-activated protein 
(MAP) kinases in these events. In THP-1 monocytic cells, toxin A activated the 3 
main MAP kinase cascades within 1 to 2 minutes. Activation of p38 was sustained, 
whereas stimulation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases and c-Jun 
NH(2)-terminal kinase was transient. Rho glucosylation became evident after 15 
minutes. IL-8 gene expression was reduced by 70% by the MEK inhibitor PD98059 
and abrogated by the p38 inhibitor SB203580 or by overexpression of 
dominant-negative mutants of the p38-activating kinases MKK3 and MKK6. SB203580 
also blocked monocyte necrosis and IL-1beta release caused by toxin A but not by 
other toxins. Finally, in mouse ileum, SB203580 prevented toxin A-induced 
neutrophil recruitment by 92% and villous destruction by 90%. Thus, in monocytes 
exposed to toxin A, MAP kinase activation appears to precede Rho glucosylation 
and is required for IL-8 transcription and cell necrosis. p38 MAP kinase also 
mediates intestinal inflammation and mucosal damage induced by toxin A.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI7545
PMCID: PMC300827
PMID: 10772660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


550. Nat Microbiol. 2019 Oct;4(10):1760-1769. doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0464-z. Epub 
2019 Jun 3.

Sulfated glycosaminoglycans and low-density lipoprotein receptor contribute to 
Clostridium difficile toxin A entry into cells.

Tao L(1)(2)(3)(4), Tian S(5)(6)(7), Zhang J(5)(6)(7), Liu Z(7), 
Robinson-McCarthy L(7), Miyashita SI(5)(6)(7), Breault DT(8)(9)(10), Gerhard 
R(11), Oottamasathien S(12), Whelan SPJ(7), Dong M(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 
taoliang@westlake.edu.cn.
(2)Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
taoliang@westlake.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA. taoliang@westlake.edu.cn.
(4)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Westlake Institute for Advanced Study, 
Westlake University, Hangzhou, China. taoliang@westlake.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Urology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA, USA.
(8)Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(10)Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(11)Institute of Toxicology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(12)Department of Surgery and Pediatric Urology, University of Utah/Primary 
Children's Hospital, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(13)Department of Urology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. 
min.dong@childrens.harvard.edu.
(14)Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
min.dong@childrens.harvard.edu.
(15)Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA. min.dong@childrens.harvard.edu.

Clostridium difficile toxin A (TcdA) is a major exotoxin contributing to 
disruption of the colonic epithelium during C. difficile infection. TcdA 
contains a carbohydrate-binding combined repetitive oligopeptides (CROPs) domain 
that mediates its attachment to cell surfaces, but recent data suggest the 
existence of CROPs-independent receptors. Here, we carried out genome-wide 
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9)-mediated screens using a truncated 
TcdA lacking the CROPs, and identified sulfated glycosaminoglycans (sGAGs) and 
low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) as host factors contributing to binding 
and entry of TcdA. TcdA recognizes the sulfation group in sGAGs. Blocking 
sulfation and glycosaminoglycan synthesis reduces TcdA binding and entry into 
cells. Binding of TcdA to the colonic epithelium can be reduced by surfen, a 
small molecule that masks sGAGs, by GM-1111, a sulfated heparan sulfate 
analogue, and by sulfated cyclodextrin, a sulfated small molecule. Cells lacking 
LDLR also show reduced sensitivity to TcdA, although binding between LDLR and 
TcdA are not detected, suggesting that LDLR may facilitate endocytosis of TcdA. 
Finally, GM-1111 reduces TcdA-induced fluid accumulation and tissue damage in 
the colon in a mouse model in which TcdA is injected into the caecum. These data 
demonstrate in vivo and pathological relevance of TcdA-sGAGs interactions, and 
reveal a potential therapeutic approach of protecting colonic tissues by 
blocking these interactions.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-019-0464-z
PMCID: PMC6754795
PMID: 31160825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.


551. Infect Immun. 2014 Jul;82(7):2815-25. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01524-14. Epub 2014 Apr 
14.

Epidemic Clostridium difficile strains demonstrate increased competitive fitness 
compared to nonepidemic isolates.

Robinson CD(1), Auchtung JM(1), Collins J(1), Britton RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, Michigan, USA rbritton@msu.edu.

Clostridium difficile infection is the most common cause of severe cases of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD) and is a significant health burden. Recent 
increases in the rate of C. difficile infection have paralleled the emergence of 
a specific phylogenetic clade of C. difficile strains (ribotype 027; North 
American pulsed-field electrophoresis 1 [NAP1]; restriction endonuclease 
analysis [REA] group BI). Initial reports indicated that ribotype 027 strains 
were associated with increased morbidity and mortality and might be 
hypervirulent. Although subsequent work has raised some doubt as to whether 
ribotype 027 strains are hypervirulent, the strains are considered epidemic 
isolates that have caused severe outbreaks across the globe. We hypothesized 
that one factor that could lead to the increased prevalence of ribotype 027 
strains would be if these strains had increased competitive fitness compared to 
strains of other ribotypes. We developed a moderate-throughput in vitro model of 
C. difficile infection and used it to test competition between four ribotype 027 
clinical isolates and clinical isolates of four other ribotypes (001, 002, 014, 
and 053). We found that ribotype 027 strains outcompeted the strains of other 
ribotypes. A similar competitive advantage was observed when two ribotype pairs 
were competed in a mouse model of C. difficile infection. Based upon these 
results, we conclude that one possible mechanism through which ribotype 027 
strains have caused outbreaks worldwide is their increased ability to compete in 
the presence of a complex microbiota.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01524-14
PMCID: PMC4097623
PMID: 24733099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


552. Gut. 1989 Aug;30(8):1087-93. doi: 10.1136/gut.30.8.1087.

Evolution of the caecal epithelial barrier during Clostridium difficile 
infection in the mouse.

Heyman M(1), Corthier G, Lucas F, Meslin JC, Desjeux JF.

Author information:
(1)INRA, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

The most striking effect of Clostridium difficile infection is its degrading of 
the intestinal barrier. The aim of this study is to establish whether the 
cellular or paracellular constituent of the barrier is the initial target of the 
toxins produced by C difficile. Accordingly, the caecal epithelium of C3H/He 
mice was challenged under three experimental conditions with the C difficile 
strain VPI 10463: (1) by in vivo inoculation of axenic mice, (2) by adding the 
toxins to ligated caeca in vivo, and (3) by adding them to the mucosal side of 
isolated caeca in Ussing chambers. Under all three conditions, the epithelial 
barrier was tested in caeca mounted in these chambers. The transepithelial 
potential difference (PD), electrical conductance (G), and intact and degraded 
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP) fluxes were used as indexes of permeability. 
Results were as follows: (1) In axenic mice, C difficile caused severe 
infection, produced toxins A and B, reduced PD, and enhanced G and intact HRP 
fluxes without changing degraded HRP fluxes, (2) four hours after the toxins 
were added to ligated caeca in vivo, PD was relatively unaltered, but G, and 
intact and degraded HRP fluxes increased, and (3) when toxins were added to 
caeca during two hours in the Ussing chambers, the only modification observed 
was an increase in degraded-HRP fluxes. These results indicate that the C 
difficile toxins gradually cause intestinal lesions. After an apparent 
resistance, they stimulate the endocytotic process and then increase 
paracellular permeability and finally cause loss of cell viability.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.30.8.1087
PMCID: PMC1434188
PMID: 2504650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


553. Hawaii J Med Public Health. 2013 Jun;72(6 Suppl 2):46-8.

A severe case of rat lungworm disease in Hawa'i.

Howe K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Hawa'i, Hilo, HI 96720, USA. kehauhowe@gmail.com

A 23-year-old man living on the island of Hawa'i developed a life threatening 
case of eosinophilic meningitis caused by infection with Angiostrongylus 
cantonensis (rat lungworm disease: RLWD). He was comatose for 3 months, 
incurring brain and nerve damage sufficiently extensive that he was not expected 
to recover. The case was complicated by secondary infections of 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, Clostridium difficile, and 
pneumonia, which resulted in an empyema requiring a thoracoscopy and 
decortication. He was treated with prednisone, mebendozal, and pain medication 
for RLWD, and antibiotics and antifungal medications for the secondary 
infections. The administration of herbal supplements was requested by the family 
and approved, and these were administered through a gastric tube. Less than a 
month after being declared in a persistent vegetative state the man was able to 
talk, eat, and had regained some muscle functions. After release from the 
hospital he continued the use of supplements and received treatments of 
intravenous vitamin therapy. Four years after onset of the illness he is able to 
ride a bicycle, is a part time student, plays guitar, and is fluent in two 
foreign languages. RLWD is an emerging tropical disease of growing importance in 
Hawa'i.

PMCID: PMC3689490
PMID: 23900708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


554. Mol Imaging Biol. 2020 Jun;22(3):587-592. doi: 10.1007/s11307-019-01408-4.

Evaluation of Clostridium difficile Infection with PET/CT Imaging in a Mouse 
Model.

Cussó L(1)(2)(3)(4), Reigadas E(2)(5)(6), Muñoz P(2)(5)(6)(7), Desco 
M(8)(9)(10)(11), Bouza E(2)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioingeniería e Ingeniería Aeroespacial, Universidad Carlos 
III de Madrid, Avenida de la Universidad 30, 28911, Leganés, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Madrid, 
Spain.
(4)Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Hospital General 
Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Medicine Department, School of Medicine, Universidad Complutense de Madrid 
(UCM), Madrid, Spain.
(7)CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES CB06/06/0058), Madrid, Spain.
(8)Departamento de Bioingeniería e Ingeniería Aeroespacial, Universidad Carlos 
III de Madrid, Avenida de la Universidad 30, 28911, Leganés, Madrid, Spain. 
desco@hggm.es.
(9)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain. 
desco@hggm.es.
(10)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Madrid, 
Spain. desco@hggm.es.
(11)Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain. 
desco@hggm.es.

PURPOSE: Existing clinical or microbiological scores are not sensitive enough to 
obtain prompt identification of patients at risk of complicated Clostridium 
difficile infection (CDI). Our aim was to use a CDI animal model to evaluate 
2-deoxy-2-[18F]fluoro-D-glucose positron emission tomography ([18F]FDG-PET) as a 
marker of severe course of infection.
PROCEDURES: CDI was induced with cefoperazone for 10 days followed by 
clindamycin 1 day before C. difficile inoculation. Mice were divided into wild 
type (n = 6), antibiotic without infection (AC n = 4), h001-infected (n = 5, 
ribotype 001), and h027-infected (n = 5, ribotype 027). Two days after 
inoculation, [18F]FDG-PET was acquired. Weight, general animal condition, and 
survival were monitored daily for 9 days.
RESULTS: h001 group showed symptoms for 4 days with 0 % mortality and a similar 
colon uptake than control animals (h001 0.52 ± 0.20, WT 0.42 ± 0.07, and AC 
0.36 ± 0.06). The h027 group showed symptoms up to 7 days, with 66.7 % of 
mortality 4 days after infection, and significantly higher colon uptake 
(0.93 ± 0.38, p < 0.05). Clinical score was associated to colon and cecum uptake 
(rho = 0.78, p = 0.0001) (rho = 0.73, p = 0.0003).
CONCLUSION: High toxin producer ribotype 027 induced more severe CDI infections, 
correlating with higher colon and cecum [18F]FDG uptake. Colon uptake may 
purportedly serve as early predictor of CDI severity.

DOI: 10.1007/s11307-019-01408-4
PMID: 31317298


555. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 25;281(34):24449-54. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M605200200. Epub 
2006 Jun 30.

Saccharomyces boulardii inhibits ERK1/2 mitogen-activated protein kinase 
activation both in vitro and in vivo and protects against Clostridium difficile 
toxin A-induced enteritis.

Chen X(1), Kokkotou EG, Mustafa N, Bhaskar KR, Sougioultzis S, O'Brien M, 
Pothoulakis C, Kelly CP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Saccharomyces boulardii (Sb), a probiotic yeast, protects against intestinal 
injury and inflammation caused by a wide variety of enteric pathogens, including 
Clostridium difficile. Given the broad range of protective effects of Sb in 
multiple gastrointestinal disorders, we hypothesize that Sb modulates host 
signaling pathways involved in intestinal inflammatory responses. In this study, 
we found that Sb culture supernatant (SbS) inhibits interleukin-8 production 
induced by C. difficile toxin A or IL-1beta in human colonocyte NCM460 cells in 
a dose-dependent fashion. Furthermore, SbS inhibited IL-1beta and toxin A 
induced Erk1/2 and JNK/SAPK but not p38 activation in NCM460 cells. To test 
whether this inhibition also occurs in vivo, we used a previously established 
mouse ileal loop model. On its own, SbS had no significant effect on basal fluid 
secretion or intestinal histology. However, Erk1/2 activation was significantly 
inhibited by SbS in toxin A exposed mouse ileal mucosa. In control loops, toxin 
A increased fluid secretion (2.2-fold), histological score (3.3-fold), and 
levels of the chemokine KC (4.5-fold). SbS pretreatment completely normalized 
toxin A mediated fluid secretion (p < 0.01), and histopathologic changes (p < 
0.01) and substantially inhibited toxin A-associated KC increases (p < 0.001). 
In summary, the probiotic yeast S. boulardii inhibits C. difficile toxin 
A-associated enteritis by blocking the activation of Erk1/2 MAP kinases. This 
study indicates a new mechanism whereby Sb protects against intestinal 
inflammation and supports the hypothesis that Sb modulates host inflammatory 
signaling pathways to exert its beneficial effects.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M605200200
PMID: 16816386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


556. Gastroenterology. 1996 Aug;111(2):433-8. doi: 10.1053/gast.1996.v111.pm8690209.

A receptor decoy inhibits the enterotoxic effects of Clostridium difficile toxin 
A in rat ileum.

Castagliuolo I(1), LaMont JT, Qiu B, Nikulasson ST, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridium difficile toxin A causes secretion and intestinal 
inflammation in rodents by binding to a specific trisaccharide Gal alpha 1-3Gal 
beta 1-4 GlcNAc on enterocyte receptors. The purpose of this study was to 
explore the ability of Synsorb 90 (Synsorb Biotech Inc., Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada), and inert support carrying this trisaccharide, to bind toxin A in vitro 
and to inhibit its enterotoxic effects in vivo.
METHODS: Binding of [3H]toxin A to Synsorb 90, Synsorb 83 (beta-mannose 
attached), and Chromosorb P (inert support with no sugar attached) (Synsorb 
Biotech Inc.) was measured. The inhibitory effects of these compounds on toxin 
A-mediated fluid secretion, mannitol permeability, and histological damage were 
measured in ileal loops in vivo.
RESULTS: Toxin A showed specific binding to Synsorb 90, bearing the specific 
trisaccharide that binds toxin A, but not to Synsorb 83 or to Chromosorb P. 
Pretreatment of rats with Synsorb 90 by gavage (200 mg/kg body wt), but no 
Synsorb 83 or Chromosorb P at the same doses, dramatically reduced toxin 
A-associated fluid secretion and permeability.
CONCLUSIONS: An immobilized toxin A receptor sequesters toxin A in the 
intestinal lumen and inhibits its effects of ileal mucosa. These results suggest 
a potential use for this agent in treating patients with C. difficile colitis.

DOI: 10.1053/gast.1996.v111.pm8690209
PMID: 8690209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


557. Dig Dis Sci. 2005 Jul;50(7):1271-8. doi: 10.1007/s10620-005-2771-x.

Clostridium difficile toxin A induces intestinal epithelial cell apoptosis and 
damage: role of Gln and Ala-Gln in toxin A effects.

Brito GA(1), Carneiro-Filho B, Oriá RB, Destura RV, Lima AA, Guerrant RL.

Author information:
(1)Center for Global Health, Department of Intemal Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of Clostridium difficile 
toxin A (TxA) on intestinal epithelial cell migration, apoptosis, and 
transepithelial resistance and to evaluate the effect of glutamine (Gln) and its 
stable derivative, alanyl-glutamine (Ala-Gln), on TxA-induced damage. Migration 
was measured in rat intestinal epithelial cells (IEC-6) 6 and 24 hr after a 
razor scrape of the cell monolayer. Cell proliferation was indirectly measured 
utilizing the tetrazolium salt WST-1. The cells were incubated with TxA (1-100 
ng/ml) in medium without Gln or medium containing Gln or Ala-Gln (1-30 mM). 
Apoptosis was quantified in IEC-6 cells using annexin V assay. Transepithelial 
resistance was measured using an epithelial voltohmmeter across T84 cells seeded 
on a transwell filter. TxA-induced a dose-dependent reduction of migration and 
also caused dose and time-dependent apoptosis in IEC-6 cells. Gln and Aln-Gln 
significantly enhanced IEC-6 cell migration and proliferation. Gln and Ala-Gln 
also prevented the inhibition of migration, apoptosis, and the initial drop in 
transepithelial resistance induced by TxA. In conclusion, both peptides reduced 
toxin-induced epithelial damage and thus might play an adjunctive role in C. 
difficile-induced colitis therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-005-2771-x
PMID: 16047471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


558. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 9;270(23):13932-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.270.23.13932.

The enterotoxin from Clostridium difficile (ToxA) monoglucosylates the Rho 
proteins.

Just I(1), Wilm M, Selzer J, Rex G, von Eichel-Streiber C, Mann M, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universität des Saarlandes, 
Federal Republic of Germany.

The enterotoxin from Clostridium difficile (ToxA) is one of the causative agents 
of the antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis. In cultured monolayer 
cells ToxA exhibits cytotoxic activity to induce disassembly of the actin 
cytoskeleton, which is accompanied by morphological changes. ToxA-induced 
depolymerization of actin filaments is correlated with a decrease in the 
ADP-ribosylation of the low molecular mass GTP-binding Rho proteins (Just, I., 
Selzer, J., von Eichel-Streiber, C., and Aktories, K. (1995) J. Clin. Invest. 
95, 1026-1031). Here we report on the identification of the ToxA-induced 
modification of Rho. Applying electrospray mass spectrometry, the mass of the 
modification was determined as 162 Da, which is consistent with the 
incorporation of a hexose into Rho. From several hexoses tested UDP-glucose 
selectively served as cosubstrate for ToxA-catalyzed modification. The acceptor 
amino acid of glucosylation was identified from a Lys-C-generated peptide by 
tandem mass spectrometry as Thr-37. Mutation of Thr-37 to Ala completely 
abolished glucosylation. The members of the Rho family (RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42Hs) 
were substrates for ToxA, whereas H-Ras, Rab5, and Arf1 were not glucosylated. 
ToxA-catalyzed glucosylation of lysates from ToxA-pretreated rat basophilic 
leukemia (RBL) cells resulted in a decreased incorporation of [14C]glucose, 
indicating previous glucosylation in the intact cell. Glucosylation of the Rho 
subtype proteins appears to be the molecular mechanism by which C. difficile 
ToxA mediates its cytotoxic effects on cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.270.23.13932
PMID: 7775453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


559. J Anim Sci Technol. 2017 Jun 12;59:15. doi: 10.1186/s40781-017-0138-4. 
eCollection 2017.

Effects of liposomal-curcumin on five opportunistic bacterial strains found in 
the equine hindgut - preliminary study.

Bland SD(1), Venable EB(1), McPherson JL(1), Atkinson RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Food & Nutrition, Southern Illinois University, 
Carbondale, IL 62901 USA.

BACKGROUND: The horse intestinal tract is sensitive and contains a highly 
complex microbial population. A shift in the microbial population can lead to 
various issues such as inflammation and colic. The use of nutraceuticals in the 
equine industry is on the rise and curcumin is thought to possess antimicrobial 
properties that may help to minimize the proliferation of opportunistic 
bacteria.
METHODS: Four cecally-cannulated horses were utilized to determine the optimal 
dose of liposomal-curcumin (LIPC) on reducing Streptococcus bovis/equinus 
complex (SBEC), Escherichia coli K-12, Escherichia coli general, Clostridium 
difficile, and Clostridium perfringens in the equine hindgut without adversely 
affecting cecal characteristics. In the first study cecal fluid was collected 
from each horse and composited for an in vitro, 24 h batch culture to examine 
LIPC at four different dosages (15, 20, 25, and 30 g) in a completely randomized 
design. A subsequent in vivo 4 × 4 Latin square design study was conducted to 
evaluate no LIPC (control, CON) or LIPC dosed at 15, 25, and 35 g per day 
(dosages determined from in vitro results) for 9 days on the efficacy of LIPC on 
selected bacterial strains, pH, and volatile fatty acids. Each period was 
14 days with 9 d for acclimation and 5 d withdrawal period.
RESULTS: In the in vitro study dosage had no effect (P ≥ 0.42) on Clostridium 
strains, but as the dose increased SBEC concentrations increased (P = 0.001). 
Concentrations of the E. coli strain varied with dose. In vivo, LIPC's 
antimicrobial properties, at 15 g, significantly decreased (P = 0.02) SBEC when 
compared to 25 and 35 g dosages. C. perfringens decreased linearly (P = 0.03) as 
LIPC dose increased. Butyrate decreased linearly (P = 0.01) as LIPC dose 
increased.
CONCLUSION: Further studies should be conducted with a longer dosing period to 
examine the antimicrobial properties of curcumin without adversely affecting 
cecal characteristics.

DOI: 10.1186/s40781-017-0138-4
PMCID: PMC5473976
PMID: 28638626


560. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2017 Apr;74(8):1527-1551. doi: 10.1007/s00018-016-2426-4. 
Epub 2016 Nov 28.

Enteric glial cells are susceptible to Clostridium difficile toxin B.

Fettucciari K(1), Ponsini P(2), Gioè D(2), Macchioni L(3), Palumbo C(4), 
Antonelli E(5), Coaccioli S(6), Villanacci V(7), Corazzi L(3), Marconi P(2), 
Bassotti G(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Histology and Medical Embryology 
Section, Perugia University, Piazza Lucio Severi 1, Edificio B IV piano, 
Sant'Andrea delle Fratte, 06132, Perugia, Italy. katia.fettucciari@unipg.it.
(2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Histology and Medical Embryology 
Section, Perugia University, Piazza Lucio Severi 1, Edificio B IV piano, 
Sant'Andrea delle Fratte, 06132, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Physiology and Biochemistry Section, 
Perugia University, Perugia, Italy.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, Tor Vergata 
University, Rome, Italy.
(5)Gastroenterology Section, Perugia General Hospital, Perugia, Italy.
(6)Department of Medicine, Internal Medicine, Rheumatology and Medical Therapy 
of Pain Section, Perugia University, District of Terni, Perugia, Italy.
(7)Pathology Section, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(8)Department of Medicine, Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Digestive Endoscopy 
Section, Perugia University, Perugia, Italy.

Clostridium difficile causes nosocomial/antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and 
pseudomembranous colitis. The major virulence factors are toxin A and toxin B 
(TcdB), which inactivate GTPases by monoglucosylation, leading to cytopathic 
(cytoskeleton alteration, cell rounding) and cytotoxic effects (cell-cycle 
arrest, apoptosis). C. difficile toxins breaching the intestinal epithelial 
barrier can act on underlying cells, enterocytes, colonocytes, and enteric 
neurons, as described in vitro and in vivo, but until now no data have been 
available on enteric glial cell (EGC) susceptibility. EGCs are crucial for 
regulating the enteric nervous system, gut homeostasis, the immune and 
inflammatory responses, and digestive and extradigestive diseases. Therefore, we 
evaluated the effects of C. difficile TcdB in EGCs. Rat-transformed EGCs were 
treated with TcdB at 0.1-10 ng/ml for 1.5-48 h, and several parameters were 
analysed. TcdB induces the following in EGCs: (1) early cell rounding with Rac1 
glucosylation; (2) early G2/M cell-cycle arrest by cyclin B1/Cdc2 complex 
inactivation caused by p27 upregulation, the downregulation of cyclin B1 and 
Cdc2 phosphorylated at Thr161 and Tyr15; and (3) apoptosis by a 
caspase-dependent but mitochondria-independent pathway. Most importantly, the 
stimulation of EGCs with TNF-α plus IFN-γ before, concomitantly or after TcdB 
treatment strongly increased TcdB-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, EGCs that 
survived the cytotoxic effect of TcdB did not recover completely and showed not 
only persistent Rac1 glucosylation, cell-cycle arrest and low apoptosis but also 
increased production of glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor, suggesting 
self-rescuing mechanisms. In conclusion, the high susceptibility of EGCs to TcdB 
in vitro, the increased sensitivity to inflammatory cytokines related to 
apoptosis and the persistence of altered functions in surviving cells suggest an 
important in vivo role of EGCs in the pathogenesis of C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-016-2426-4
PMID: 27891552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


561. Ciba Found Symp. 1985;112:230-41. doi: 10.1002/9780470720936.ch13.

Clostridial toxins active locally in the gastrointestinal tract.

Wilkins T, Krivan H, Stiles B, Carman R, Lyerly D.

Clostridium difficile and Clostridium spiroforme have only in recent years been 
recognized as intestinal pathogens. They both produce toxins that are also 
produced by other clostridia. C. difficile toxins A and B are produced by C. 
sordellii and a few strains of C. perfringens whereas C. spiroforme produces the 
same toxins as C. perfringens Type E (iota toxin). Iota toxin activity may be 
the product of two proteins. Toxigenic strains of C. spiroforme and Type E 
produce two antigens which possess much more biological activity when 
administered together than when given alone. C. difficile was thought for some 
time to produce only a single toxin, but then the enterotoxic activity was shown 
to be due to a separate toxin (toxin A). This toxin increases the oral toxicity 
of toxin B (the main cytotoxin) and may increase the permeability of the colon. 
Toxin A binds to a specific receptor in hamster brush border membranes and in 
the membranes of rabbit erythrocytes. This receptor appears to be a 
glycoprotein. The receptor can be extracted from the membrane with Triton and 
binds to immobilized toxin A. The receptor can be extracted and used to coat 
plastic plates as a first phase in an ELISA assay. Another assay has been 
developed in which the toxin A binds to the red cells and then the erythrocytes 
are agglutinated with antitoxin. An even more sensitive assay consists of using 
rabbit erythrocyte ghosts to bind the toxin and then precipitating the ghosts 
with antibody to toxin A attached to latex beads. Monoclonal antibodies to toxin 
A also have been developed and are used in these and other assays.

DOI: 10.1002/9780470720936.ch13
PMID: 2861069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


562. J Clin Microbiol. 2009 Nov;47(11):3673-81. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00879-09. Epub 2009 
Sep 16.

Chronic hepatitis, hepatic dysplasia, fibrosis, and biliary hyperplasia in 
hamsters naturally infected with a novel Helicobacter classified in the H. bilis 
cluster.

Fox JG(1), Shen Z, Muthupalani S, Rogers AR, Kirchain SM, Dewhirst FE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Comparative Medicine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 
Massachusetts Ave., Bldg. 16-825, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. jgfox@mit.edu

We recently described helicobacter-associated progressive, proliferative, and 
dysplastic typhlocolitis in aging (18- to 24-month-old) Syrian hamsters. Other 
pathogens associated with typhlocolitis in hamsters, Clostridium difficile, 
Lawsonia intracellularis, and Giardia spp., were not indentified. The presence 
of Helicobacter genus-specific DNA was noted by PCR in cecal and 
paraffin-embedded liver samples from aged hamsters by the use of 
Helicobacter-specific PCR primers. By 16S rRNA analysis, the Helicobacter sp. 
isolated from the liver tissue was identical to the cecal isolates from 
hamsters. The six hamster 16S rRNA sequences form a genotypic cluster most 
closely related to Helicobacter sp. Flexispira taxon 8, part of the Helicobacter 
bilis/H. cinaedi group. Livers from aged helicobacter-infected hamsters showed 
various stages of predominantly portocentric and, to a lesser extent, 
perivenular fibrosis. Within nodules, there was cellular atypia consistent with 
nodular dysplasia. The livers also exhibited a range of chronic active 
portal/interface and lobular inflammation, with significant portal hepatitis 
being present. The inflammation was composed of a mixture of lymphocytes, 
neutrophils, and macrophages, indicative of its chronic-active nature in these 
aged hamsters infected with Helicobacter spp. The isolation of novel 
Helicobacter spp., their identification by PCR from the diseased livers of aged 
hamsters, and their taxonomic classification as belonging to the Helicobacter 
bilis cluster strengthen the argument that H. bilis and closely related 
Helicobacter spp. play an etiological role in hepatobiliary disease in both 
animals and humans.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.00879-09
PMCID: PMC2772605
PMID: 19759229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


563. Infect Immun. 2016 Sep 19;84(10):2842-52. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00341-16. Print 2016 
Oct.

Recombinant Mucin-Type Fusion Proteins with a Galα1,3Gal Substitution as 
Clostridium difficile Toxin A Inhibitors.

Cherian RM(1), Jin C(2), Liu J(3), Karlsson NG(2), Holgersson J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of 
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden 
reejamaria@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Institute of Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska 
Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of 
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

The capability of a recombinant mucin-like fusion protein, P-selectin 
glycoprotein ligand-1/mouse IgG2b (PSGL-1/mIgG2b), carrying Galα1,3Galβ1,4GlcNAc 
determinants to bind and inhibit Clostridium difficile toxin A (TcdA) was 
investigated. The fusion protein, produced by a glyco-engineered stable CHO-K1 
cell line and designated C-PGC2, was purified by affinity and gel filtration 
chromatography from large-scale cultures. Liquid chromatography-mass 
spectrometry was used to characterize O-glycans released by reductive 
β-elimination, and new diagnostic ions to distinguish Galα1,3Gal- from 
Galα1,4Gal-terminated O-glycans were identified. The C-PGC2 cell line, which was 
20-fold more sensitive to TcdA than the wild-type CHO-K1, is proposed as a novel 
cell-based model for TcdA cytotoxicity and neutralization assays. The 
C-PGC2-produced fusion protein could competitively inhibit TcdA binding to 
rabbit erythrocytes, making it a high-efficiency inhibitor of the 
hemagglutination property of TcdA. The fusion protein also exhibited a moderate 
capability for neutralization of TcdA cytotoxicity in both C-PGC2 and CHO-K1 
cells, the former with and the latter without cell surface Galα1,3Galβ1,4GlcNAc 
sequences. Future studies in animal models of C. difficile infection will reveal 
its TcdA-inhibitory effect and therapeutic potential in C. difficile-associated 
diseases.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00341-16
PMCID: PMC5038087
PMID: 27456831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


564. PLoS Pathog. 2017 Jul 13;13(7):e1006443. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006443. 
eCollection 2017 Jul.

Intestinal calcium and bile salts facilitate germination of Clostridium 
difficile spores.

Kochan TJ(1), Somers MJ(1), Kaiser AM(1), Shoshiev MS(1), Hagan AK(1), Hastie 
JL(2), Giordano NP(2), Smith AD(2), Schubert AM(2), Carlson PE Jr(2), Hanna 
PC(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan Medical School, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology. Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.
(2)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, US Food and Drug 
Administration. Silver Spring, Maryland, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2017 Sep 7;13(9):e1006605.

Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) is an anaerobic gram-positive pathogen that 
is the leading cause of nosocomial bacterial infection globally. C. difficile 
infection (CDI) typically occurs after ingestion of infectious spores by a 
patient that has been treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics. While CDI is a 
toxin-mediated disease, transmission and pathogenesis are dependent on the 
ability to produce viable spores. These spores must become metabolically active 
(germinate) in order to cause disease. C. difficile spore germination occurs 
when spores encounter bile salts and other co-germinants within the small 
intestine, however, the germination signaling cascade is unclear. Here we 
describe a signaling role for Ca2+ during C. difficile spore germination and 
provide direct evidence that intestinal Ca2+ coordinates with bile salts to 
stimulate germination. Endogenous Ca2+ (released from within the spore) and a 
putative AAA+ ATPase, encoded by Cd630_32980, are both essential for 
taurocholate-glycine induced germination in the absence of exogenous Ca2+. 
However, environmental Ca2+ replaces glycine as a co-germinant and circumvents 
the need for endogenous Ca2+ fluxes. Cd630_32980 is dispensable for colonization 
in a murine model of C. difficile infection and ex vivo germination in mouse 
ileal contents. Calcium-depletion of the ileal contents prevented mutant spore 
germination and reduced WT spore germination by 90%, indicating that Ca2+ 
present within the gastrointestinal tract plays a critical role in C. difficile 
germination, colonization, and pathogenesis. These data provide a biological 
mechanism that may explain why individuals with inefficient intestinal calcium 
absorption (e.g., vitamin D deficiency, proton pump inhibitor use) are more 
prone to CDI and suggest that modulating free intestinal calcium is a potential 
strategy to curb the incidence of CDI.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006443
PMCID: PMC5509370
PMID: 28704538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


565. Infect Immun. 2014 Feb;82(2):522-31. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01273-13. Epub 2013 Nov 
11.

Protection from Clostridium difficile infection in CD4 T Cell- and polymeric 
immunoglobulin receptor-deficient mice.

Johnston PF(1), Gerding DN, Knight KL.

Author information:
(1)Loyola University Chicago Stritch School of Medicine, Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, Maywood, Illinois, USA.

Clostridium difficile rivals methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus as the 
primary hospital-acquired infection. C. difficile infection (CDI) caused by 
toxins A and/or B can manifest as mild diarrhea to life-threatening 
pseudomembranous colitis. Although most patients recover fully from CDI, ~20% 
undergo recurrent disease. Several studies have demonstrated a correlation 
between anti-toxin antibody (Ab) and decreased recurrence; however, the 
contributions of the systemic and mucosal Ab responses remain unclear. Our goal 
was to use the CDI mouse model to characterize the protective immune response to 
C. difficile. C57BL/6 mice infected with epidemic C. difficile strain BI17 
developed protective immunity against CDI and did not develop CDI upon 
rechallenge; they generated systemic IgG and IgA as well as mucosal IgA Ab to 
toxin. To determine if protective immunity to C. difficile could be generated in 
immunodeficient individuals, we infected CD4(-/-) mice and found that they 
generated both mucosal and serum IgA anti-toxin Abs and were protected from CDI 
upon rechallenge, with protection dependent on major histocompatibility complex 
class II (MHCII) expression; no IgG anti-toxin Ab was found. We found that 
protection was likely due to neutralizing mucosal IgA Ab. In contrast, pIgR(-/-) 
mice, which lack the receptor to transcytose polymeric Ab across the epithelium, 
were also protected from CDI, suggesting that although mucosal anti-toxin Ab may 
contribute to protection, it is not required. We conclude that protection from 
CDI can occur by several mechanisms and that the mechanism of protection is 
determined by the state of immunocompetence of the host.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01273-13
PMCID: PMC3911374
PMID: 24478068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


566. Ther Adv Infect Dis. 2013 Feb;1(1):19-35. doi: 10.1177/2049936112472173.

The host immune response to Clostridium difficile infection.

Solomon K(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin, Belfield, 
Dublin 4, Republic of Ireland.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the most common infectious cause of 
healthcare-acquired diarrhoea. Outcomes of C. difficile colonization are varied, 
from asymptomatic carriage to fulminant colitis and death, due in part to the 
interplay between the pathogenic virulence factors of the bacterium and the 
counteractive immune responses of the host. Secreted toxins A and B are the 
major virulence factors of C. difficile and induce a profound inflammatory 
response by intoxicating intestinal epithelial cells causing proinflammatory 
cytokine release. Host cell necrosis, vascular permeability and neutrophil 
infiltration lead to an elevated white cell count, profuse diarrhoea and in 
severe cases, dehydration, hypoalbuminaemia and toxic megacolon. Other bacterial 
virulence factors, including surface layer proteins and flagella proteins, are 
detected by host cell surface signal molecules that trigger downstream 
cell-mediated immune pathways. Human studies have identified a role for serum 
and faecal immunoglobulin levels in protection from disease, but the recent 
development of a mouse model of CDI has enabled studies into the precise 
molecular interactions that trigger the immune response during infection. Key 
effector molecules have been identified that can drive towards a protective 
anti-inflammatory response or a damaging proinflammatory response. The 
limitations of current antimicrobial therapies for CDI have led to the 
development of both active and passive immunotherapies, none of which have, as 
yet been formally approved for CDI. However, recent advances in our 
understanding of the molecular basis of host immune protection against CDI may 
provide an exciting opportunity for novel therapeutic developments in the 
future.

DOI: 10.1177/2049936112472173
PMCID: PMC4040718
PMID: 25165542


567. J Clin Pathol. 1987 May;40(5):573-80. doi: 10.1136/jcp.40.5.573.

Analysis of latex agglutination test for Clostridium difficile toxin A (D-1) and 
differentiation between C difficile toxins A and B and latex reactive protein.

Borriello SP, Barclay FE, Reed PJ, Welch AR, Brown JD, Burdon DW.

Virulent toxigenic and avirulent non-toxigenic strains of Clostridium difficile 
gave a positive result in the latex agglutination test (LAT) for C difficile 
toxin A (D-1). Similar concentrations of latex agglutinating antigen were 
produced by these strains in vivo. Positive reactions were also given by C 
sporogenes, proteolytic C botulinum Types A, B, and A/F, and Bacteroides 
assaccharolyticus. The latex agglutinating antigen was denatured by boiling for 
10 minutes, but not by heating at 56 degrees C for 30 minutes. The reaction was 
abolished by incubation of test material with crude C difficile antitoxin but 
not with other clostridial antitoxins or specific antitoxin to C difficile toxin 
A. The latex agglutinating antigen present in C difficile eluted between 0.39% 
and 0.47% M sodium chloride, and that produced by the other clostridia, between 
0.35% and 0.43% M sodium chloride by fast protein liquid chromatography. The 
latex agglutinating antigen of C difficile was neither cytotoxic nor mouse 
lethal and was distinct from toxin A and toxin B. In the analysis of faecal 
specimens from patients with diarrhoea the latex agglutination test correlated 
better with the presence of C difficile than with toxin B and detected both 
toxigenic and non-toxigenic strains. The latex agglutination test should only be 
used in the laboratory as an alternative to culture for C difficile and not as a 
method for the detection of C difficile toxins.

DOI: 10.1136/jcp.40.5.573
PMCID: PMC1141028
PMID: 3108333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


568. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2018 Feb 15;24(3):573-582. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izx059.

Mice with Inflammatory Bowel Disease are Susceptible to Clostridium difficile 
Infection With Severe Disease Outcomes.

Zhou F(1), Hamza T(2), Fleur AS(2), Zhang Y(2), Yu H(2), Chen K(2), Heath JE(3), 
Chen Y(4), Huang H(1), Feng H(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Antibiotics, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, University of Maryland School of 
Dentistry, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure 
Research, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Over the past several decades, there has been a significant increase 
in the incidence of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in patients suffering 
from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, a wild-type animal model is not 
available to study these comorbid diseases.
METHODS: We evaluated the susceptibility to CDI of mice with dextran sulfate 
sodium salt (DSS)-induced colitis (IBD mice) with or without antibiotic 
exposure; we examined the histopathology and cytokine response in the 
concomitant diseases after the model was created.
RESULTS: No CDI occurs in healthy control mice, wherease the incidence of CDI in 
IBD mice is 40%; however, in IBD mice that received antibiotics, the incidence 
of CDI is 100% and the disease is accompanied by high levels of toxins in the 
mouse feces and sera. Compared to IBD and CDI alone, those IBD mice infected 
with C. difficile have more severe symptoms, toxemia, histopathological damage, 
and higher mortality. Moreover, several proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines 
are significantly elevated in the colon tissues from IBD mice infected with C. 
difficile.
CONCLUSIONS: We, for the first time, demonstrate in an animal model that mice 
with dextran sulfate sodium induced-inflammatory bowel disease are significantly 
more susceptible to C. difficile infection, and that the bacterial infection led 
to more severe disease and death. These findings are consistent with clinical 
observations, thus, the animal model will permit us to study the pathogenesis of 
these concurrent diseases and to develop therapeutic strategies against the 
comorbidity of IBD and CDI.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izx059
PMCID: PMC5936643
PMID: 29462386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


569. Infect Immun. 2002 Oct;70(10):5770-8. doi: 10.1128/iai.70.10.5770-5778.2002.

Binding of Clostridium difficile surface layer proteins to gastrointestinal 
tissues.

Calabi E(1), Calabi F, Phillips AD, Fairweather NF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Centre for Molecular Microbiology and 
Infection, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London SW7 2AY, 
United Kingdom.

Clostridium difficile is the etiological agent of antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea, a potentially serious condition frequently affecting elderly 
hospitalized patients. While tissue damage is primarily induced by two toxins, 
the mechanism of gut colonization, and particularly the role of bacterial 
adherence to the mucosa, remains to be clarified. Previous studies have shown 
binding of C. difficile whole cells to cultured cell lines and suggested the 
existence of multiple adhesins, only one of which has been molecularly 
characterized. In this paper, we have investigated tissue binding of C. 
difficile surface layer proteins (SLPs), which are the predominant outer surface 
components and are encoded by the slpA gene. The adherence of C. difficile to 
HEp-2 cells was studied by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and 
fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis, which showed that antibodies to the 
high-molecular-weight (MW) SLP inhibited adherence. Immunohistochemical analysis 
of human gastrointestinal tissue sections revealed strong binding both to the 
surface epithelium lining the digestive cavities and to the subjacent lamina 
propria, while glands were negative. A similar pattern was observed in the 
mouse. By using purified recombinant SLPs, we show that binding is largely 
mediated by the high-MW SLP. By Western blotting analysis, we have identified 
two potential ligands of the C. difficile SLPs, one of which may be specific to 
the gut. By using purified extracellular matrix components immobilized on 
nitrocellulose, we also show SLP binding to collagen I, thrombospondin, and 
vitronectin, but not to collagen IV, fibronectin, or laminin. These results 
raise the possibility that the SLPs play a role both in the initial colonization 
of the gut by C. difficile and in the subsequent inflammatory reaction.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.70.10.5770-5778.2002
PMCID: PMC128314
PMID: 12228307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


570. ACS Infect Dis. 2020 May 8;6(5):820-831. doi: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00374. Epub 
2020 Jan 2.

Evaluation of a Dual-Acting Antibacterial Agent, TNP-2092, on Gut Microbiota and 
Potential Application in the Treatment of Gastrointestinal and Liver Disorders.

Yuan Y(1), Wang X(1), Xu X(1), Liu Y(1), Li C(2), Yang M(2), Yang Y(3), Ma Z(1).

Author information:
(1)TenNor Therapeutics Limited, 218 Xinghu Street, Suzhou Industrial Park, 
Suzhou 215123, China.
(2)WuXi AppTec (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., 288 Fute Zhong Road, Waigaoqiao, China 
(Shanghai) Pilot Free Trade Zone, Shanghai 200131, China.
(3)BGI Genomics, BGI Park, No.21 Hongan 3rd Street, Yantian District, Shenzhen 
518083, China.

TNP-2092 is a unique multitargeting drug conjugate with extremely low propensity 
for development of resistance. The in vitro activity of TNP-2092 against a panel 
of urease-producing bacteria was similar to that of rifaximin, a locally acting 
antibiotic approved for the treatment of hepatic encephalopathy, irritable bowel 
syndrome with diarrhea, and traveler's diarrhea. When given orally, TNP-2092 
exhibited low absorption and the majority of compound was recovered in feces as 
parent. The impact of oral TNP-2092 on gut microbiota was investigated in rats. 
TNP-2092 was administered to rats by oral gavage for 7 days. Feces samples were 
collected and analyzed by 16S rRNA sequencing. Although the total amount of 
bacterial load appeared relatively unchanged before, during, and after 
treatment, significant changes in the relative abundance of certain gut bacteria 
at family and genus levels were observed. Some of the changes are known to be 
associated with improvement of symptoms associated with liver cirrhosis and 
hepatic encephalopathy. The observed effects of TNP-2092 on gut microbiota in 
rats were similar to those of rifaximin. In vivo, TNP-2092 demonstrated potent 
efficacy in a mouse Clostridium difficile infection model, superior to 
metronidazole and vancomycin, with no relapse observed after treatment. TNP-2092 
is currently in clinical development for the treatment of symptoms associated 
with gastrointestinal and liver disorders.

DOI: 10.1021/acsinfecdis.9b00374
PMID: 31849218


571. Infect Immun. 2013 Oct;81(10):3757-69. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00515-13. Epub 2013 Jul 
29.

Adaptive strategies and pathogenesis of Clostridium difficile from in vivo 
transcriptomics.

Janoir C(1), Denève C, Bouttier S, Barbut F, Hoys S, Caleechum L, 
Chapetón-Montes D, Pereira FC, Henriques AO, Collignon A, Monot M, Dupuy B.

Author information:
(1)EA 4043, Université Paris-Sud 11, Faculté de Pharmacie, Châtenay-Malabry, 
France.

Erratum in
    Infect Immun. 2014 Feb;82(2):914.

Clostridium difficile is currently the major cause of nosocomial intestinal 
diseases associated with antibiotic therapy in adults. In order to improve our 
knowledge of C. difficile-host interactions, we analyzed the genome-wide 
temporal expression of C. difficile 630 genes during the first 38 h of mouse 
colonization to identify genes whose expression is modulated in vivo, suggesting 
that they may play a role in facilitating the colonization process. In the ceca 
of the C. difficile-monoassociated mice, 549 genes of the C. difficile genome 
were differentially expressed compared to their expression during in vitro 
growth, and they were distributed in several functional categories. Overall, our 
results emphasize the roles of genes involved in host adaptation. Colonization 
results in a metabolic shift, with genes responsible for the fermentation as 
well as several other metabolic pathways being regulated inversely to those 
involved in carbon metabolism. In addition, several genes involved in stress 
responses, such as ferrous iron uptake or the response to oxidative stress, were 
regulated in vivo. Interestingly, many genes encoding conserved hypothetical 
proteins (CHP) were highly and specifically upregulated in vivo. Moreover, genes 
for all stages of sporulation were quickly induced in vivo, highlighting the 
observation that sporulation is central to the persistence of C. difficile in 
the gut and to its ability to spread in the environment. Finally, we inactivated 
two genes that were differentially expressed in vivo and evaluated the relative 
colonization fitness of the wild-type and mutant strains in coinfection 
experiments. We identified a CHP as a putative colonization factor, supporting 
the suggestion that the in vivo transcriptomic approach can unravel new C. 
difficile virulence genes.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00515-13
PMCID: PMC3811758
PMID: 23897605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


572. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Jul 3;135(26):9713-22. doi: 10.1021/ja401410y. Epub 2013 Jun 
24.

Immunological evaluation of a synthetic Clostridium difficile oligosaccharide 
conjugate vaccine candidate and identification of a minimal epitope.

Martin CE(1), Broecker F, Oberli MA, Komor J, Mattner J, Anish C, Seeberger PH.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, 14424 Potsdam, Germany.

Clostridium difficile is the cause of emerging nosocomial infections that result 
in abundant morbidity and mortality worldwide. Thus, the development of a 
vaccine to kill the bacteria to prevent this disease is highly desirable. 
Several recently identified bacterial surface glycans, such as PS-I and PS-II, 
are promising vaccine candidates to preclude C. difficile infection. To 
circumvent difficulties with the generation of natural PS-I due to its low 
expression levels in bacterial cultures, improved chemical synthesis protocols 
for the pentasaccharide repeating unit of PS-I and oligosaccharide substructures 
were utilized to produce large quantities of well-defined PS-I related glycans. 
The analysis of stool and serum samples obtained from C. difficile patients 
using glycan microarrays of synthetic oligosaccharide epitopes revealed humoral 
immune responses to the PS-I related glycan epitopes. Two different vaccine 
candidates were evaluated in the mouse model. A synthetic PS-I repeating unit 
CRM197 conjugate was immunogenic in mice and induced immunoglobulin class 
switching as well as affinity maturation. Microarray screening employing PS-I 
repeating unit substructures revealed the disaccharide Rha-(1→3)-Glc as a 
minimal epitope. A CRM197-Rha-(1→3)-Glc disaccharide conjugate was able to 
elicit antibodies recognizing the C. difficile PS-I pentasaccharide. We herein 
demonstrate that glycan microarrays exposing defined oligosaccharide epitopes 
help to determine the minimal immunogenic epitopes of complex oligosaccharide 
antigens. The synthetic PS-I pentasaccharide repeating unit as well as the 
Rha-(1→3)-Glc disaccharide are promising novel vaccine candidates against C. 
difficile that are currently in preclinical evaluation.

DOI: 10.1021/ja401410y
PMID: 23795894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


573. Infect Immun. 2013 Mar;81(3):713-22. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00186-12. Epub 2012 Dec 
21.

MAPK-activated protein kinase 2 contributes to Clostridium difficile-associated 
inflammation.

Bobo LD(1), El Feghaly RE, Chen YS, Dubberke ER, Han Z, Baker AH, Li J, Burnham 
CA, Haslam DB.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, StLouis, 
Missouri, USA.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) results in toxin-induced epithelial injury 
and marked intestinal inflammation. Fecal markers of intestinal inflammation 
correlate with CDI disease severity, but regulation of the inflammatory response 
is poorly understood. Previous studies demonstrated that C. difficile toxin TcdA 
activates p38 kinase in tissue culture cells and mouse ilium, resulting in 
interleukin-8 (IL-8) release. Here, we investigated the role of phosphorylated 
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-activated protein kinase (MK2 kinase, 
pMK2), a key mediator of p38-dependent inflammation, in CDI. Exposure of 
cultured intestinal epithelial cells to the C. difficile toxins TcdA and TcdB 
resulted in p38-dependent MK2 activation. Toxin-induced IL-8 and GROα release 
required MK2 activity. We found that p38 and MK2 are activated in response to 
other actin-disrupting agents, suggesting that toxin-induced cytoskeleton 
disruption is the trigger for kinase-dependent cytokine response. Phosphorylated 
MK2 was detected in the intestines of C. difficile-infected hamsters and mice, 
demonstrating for the first time that the pathway is activated in infected 
animals. Furthermore, we found that elevated pMK2 correlated with the presence 
of toxigenic C. difficile among 100 patient stool samples submitted for C. 
difficile testing. In conclusion, we find that MK2 kinase is activated by TcdA 
and TcdB and regulates the expression of proinflammatory cytokines. Activation 
of p38-MK2 in infected animals and humans suggests that this pathway is a key 
driver of intestinal inflammation in patients with CDI.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00186-12
PMCID: PMC3584893
PMID: 23264053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


574. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 Feb;55(2):546-9. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00839-10. 
Epub 2010 Dec 6.

Tigecycline exhibits inhibitory activity against Clostridium difficile in the 
colon of mice and does not promote growth or toxin production.

Jump RL(1), Li Y, Pultz MJ, Kypriotakis G, Donskey CJ.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, Louis Stokes Cleveland 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Tigecycline is a broad-spectrum glycylcycline antibiotic with potent in vitro 
activity against Clostridium difficile. We used a mouse model to test the 
hypothesis that tigecycline has a low propensity to promote colonization and 
toxin production by C. difficile due to inhibitory activity in the colon. Mice 
(5 to 8 per group) received subcutaneous injections of tigecycline (low and high 
doses) alone or in combination with clindamycin for 6 days. Growth of and toxin 
production by 3 strains of C. difficile (tigecycline MICs ≤ 0.012 μg/ml) were 
measured in cecal contents collected 6 h or 3 days after the final antibiotic 
dose. Antibiotic concentrations were measured using a bioassay, and 
concentrations of total anaerobes and Bacteroides spp. were measured. The 
effects of tigecycline on rendering mice susceptible to colonization with and 
reducing the burden of C. difficile were also examined. In comparison to saline 
controls, clindamycin promoted the growth of C. difficile (P < 0.001) in cecal 
contents, whereas tigecycline did not. Tigecycline did not suppress total 
anaerobes or Bacteroides spp. in comparison to saline controls. Concurrent 
administration of tigecycline prevented clindamycin-induced promotion of C. 
difficile in cecal contents collected 6 h or 3 days (high dose only) after the 
final antibiotic dose. Tigecycline did not promote the establishment of 
colonization in mice, yet it did not reduce concentrations of C. difficile in 
animals with established colonization. In summary, tigecycline did not promote 
the growth of or toxin production by C. difficile, probably due to inhibitory 
activity against C. difficile and relative sparing of indigenous anaerobic 
microflora.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00839-10
PMCID: PMC3028805
PMID: 21135181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


575. Infect Immun. 2009 Jun;77(6):2294-303. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01577-08. Epub 2009 Mar 
23.

Antibody-enhanced, Fc gamma receptor-mediated endocytosis of Clostridium 
difficile toxin A.

He X(1), Sun X, Wang J, Wang X, Zhang Q, Tzipori S, Feng H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Tufts 
University Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, MA 01536, USA.

Toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB) are major virulence factors of Clostridium 
difficile. These two toxins intoxicate cultured cells by similar mechanisms, and 
TcdB generally is more potent than TcdA in cultured cells. The exact reason for 
this difference is unclear. Here, we report that the cellular effects of TcdA 
can be substantially enhanced via an opsonizing antibody through Fc gamma 
receptor I (FcgammaRI)-mediated endocytosis. A TcdA-specific monoclonal 
antibody, A1H3, was found to significantly enhance the cytotoxicity of TcdA to 
macrophages and monocytes. The A1H3-dependent enhancement of glucosyltransferase 
activity, cytoskeleton disruption, and tumor necrosis factor alpha production 
induced by TcdA was further demonstrated using RAW 264.7 cells. Subsequent 
experiments indicated that the interaction of FcgammaRI with A1H3 underlays the 
antibody-dependent enhancement of the cellular effects of TcdA. While blocking 
FcgammaRII and FcgammaRIII with anti-CD16/32 antibodies did not affect the 
TcdA-mediated glucosylation of Rac1 in RAW 264.7 cells, presaturation of 
FcgammaRI with anti-CD64 antibodies in THP1 cells significantly reduced this 
activity. Incubation of a TcdA-A1H3 immune complex with recombinant mouse CD64 
completely abrogated the A1H3-mediated enhancement of the glucosyltransferase 
activity of TcdA in RAW 264.7 cells. Moreover, expression of FcgammaRI in CHO 
cells strikingly enhanced the sensitivity of these cells to TcdA complexed with 
A1H3. We showed that the presence of A1H3 facilitated cell surface recruitment 
of TcdA, contributing to the antibody-dependent, FcgammaRI-mediated enhancement 
of TcdA activity. Finally, studies using chlorpromazine and endosomal 
acidification inhibitors revealed an important role of the endocytic pathway in 
the A1H3-dependent enhancement of TcdA activity.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.01577-08
PMCID: PMC2687358
PMID: 19307220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


576. Infect Immun. 1997 Jul;65(7):2740-6. doi: 10.1128/IAI.65.7.2740-2746.1997.

Clostridium difficile toxin A induces the release of neutrophil chemotactic 
factors from rat peritoneal macrophages: role of interleukin-1beta, tumor 
necrosis factor alpha, and leukotrienes.

Rocha MF(1), Maia ME, Bezerra LR, Lyerly DM, Guerrant RL, Ribeiro RA, Lima AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Health Sciences Center, Federal 
University of Ceará, Fortaleza-CE, Brazil.

Clostridium difficile produces a potent enterotoxin and cytotoxin, toxins A and 
B, respectively, which appear to be responsible for pseudomenbranous colitis and 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea. In the present study we explored the neutrophil 
migration evoked by toxin A in the peritoneal cavities and subcutaneous air 
pouches of rats and examined the role of macrophages and their inflammatory 
mediators in this process. Toxin A causes a significant dose-dependent 
neutrophil influx into the peritoneal cavity, with a maximal response at 0.1 
microg/ml and at 4 h. The depletion of macrophages by peritoneal washing 
prevents the toxin A-induced neutrophil migration into the peritoneal cavity. In 
contrast, an increase in macrophages induced by peritoneal injection of 
thioglycolate amplifies this toxin effect on neutrophil migration. Furthermore, 
the injection of supernatants from toxin A-stimulated macrophages into the rat 
peritoneal cavity causes significant neutrophil migration. Pretreatment of rats 
with BWA4C, nordihydroguaiaretic acid, mepacrine, or dexamethasone inhibits the 
neutrophil migration evoked by toxin A in the peritoneal cavities. However, 
pretreatment with the cyclooxygenase inhibitor indomethacin or the 
platelet-activating factor antagonist BN52021 fails to alter toxin A-induced 
neutrophil migration. Toxin A was also injected into air pouches of normal rats 
or rats pretreated with anti-interleukin-1beta (anti-IL-1beta) or anti-tumor 
necrosis factor alpha (anti-TNF-alpha) antibodies. Anti-TNF-alpha or 
anti-IL-1beta antibodies significantly reduce the neutrophil migration induced 
by toxin A. These data suggest that neutrophil migration evoked by toxin A is in 
part dependent on macrophage-derived cytokines, such as TNF-alpha and IL-1beta, 
and leukotrienes. These mediators may help to explain the intense inflammatory 
colitis caused by C. dificile toxin A in an experimental animal model of this 
disease.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.65.7.2740-2746.1997
PMCID: PMC175386
PMID: 9199444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


577. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1994 Mar;27(3):743-8.

Vascular and glomerular effects of Clostridium difficile toxin A peptide on the 
isolated rat kidney.

Monteiro HS(1), Santos-Neto MS, Oliveira AV, Lima AA, Lyerly DM, Fonteles MC.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiologia e Farmacologia, Universidade Federal do Ceará, 
Fortaleza, Brasil.

Toxin A peptide from Clostridium difficile caused damage and secretion in the 
intestinal mucosa. These effects are mediated in part by pro-inflammatory 
substances. In order to evaluate and compare the biologic effect of toxin A on 
renal vascular, glomerular and tubular functions, we studied this toxin in 
isolated rat kidneys. Isolated kidneys from adult male Wistar rats (260-320 g) 
were perfused with Krebs-Henseleit solution containing 60 mg/ml dialyzed bovine 
serum albumin. We studied the effect of toxin A peptide (3.2 x 10(-6) M, 
injected into perfusate) on glomerular filtration rate (GFR), urinary flow rate 
(UF) and total sodium reabsorption (TNa+, %). All experiments were preceded by a 
30-min basal period, and in another group of kidneys the time course of the 
variables was followed without toxin infusion for unpaired control. Toxin A 
(TxA) reduced the perfusion pressure (PP), from PPcontrol/30min = 124.89 +/- 
1.91 to PPTxA/120min = 88.13 +/- 5.1 mmHg (N = 6, P < 0.01) with a maximal 
effect at 120 min after toxin infusion. TxA also caused a significant decrease 
in GFR with maximal effect at 90 min after toxin infusion (GFRcontrol/30min = 
0.53 +/- 0.05 to GFRTxA/90min = 0.30 + 0.05 ml min-1g-1; N = 6, P < 0.01). TxA 
did not alter renal tubular sodium transport when compared with a control 
without toxin infusion. In addition, toxin-treated kidneys caused a 
time-dependent increase in urinary flow from UFcontrol/30min = 0.16 +/- 0.08 to 
UFTxA/120min = 0.35 +/- 0.1 ml min-1g-1 (N = 6, P < 0.05).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)

PMID: 8081300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


578. Infect Immun. 1999 Jan;67(1):302-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.67.1.302-307.1999.

Saccharomyces boulardii protease inhibits the effects of Clostridium difficile 
toxins A and B in human colonic mucosa.

Castagliuolo I(1), Riegler MF, Valenick L, LaMont JT, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Saccharomyces boulardii is a nonpathogenic yeast used in the treatment of 
Clostridium difficile diarrhea and colitis. We have reported that S. boulardii 
inhibits C. difficile toxin A enteritis in rats by releasing a 54-kDa protease 
which digests the toxin A molecule and its brush border membrane (BBM) receptor 
(I. Castagliuolo, J. T. LaMont, S. T. Nikulasson, and C. Pothoulakis, Infect. 
Immun. 64:5225-5232, 1996). The aim of this study was to further evaluate the 
role of S. boulardii protease in preventing C. difficile toxin A enteritis in 
rat ileum and determine whether it protects human colonic mucosa from C. 
difficile toxins. A polyclonal rabbit antiserum raised against purified S. 
boulardii serine protease inhibited by 73% the proteolytic activity present in 
S. boulardii conditioned medium in vitro. The anti-protease immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) prevented the action of S. boulardii on toxin A-induced intestinal 
secretion and mucosal permeability to [3H]mannitol in rat ileal loops, while 
control rabbit IgG had no effect. The anti-protease IgG also prevented the 
effects of S. boulardii protease on digestion of toxins A and B and on binding 
of [3H]toxin A and [3H]toxin B to purified human colonic BBM. Purified S. 
boulardii protease reversed toxin A- and toxin B-induced inhibition of protein 
synthesis in human colonic (HT-29) cells. Furthermore, toxin A- and B-induced 
drops in transepithelial resistance in human colonic mucosa mounted in Ussing 
chambers were reversed by 60 and 68%, respectively, by preexposing the toxins to 
S. boulardii protease. We conclude that the protective effects of S. boulardii 
on C. difficile-induced inflammatory diarrhea in humans are due, at least in 
part, to proteolytic digestion of toxin A and B molecules by a secreted 
protease.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.67.1.302-307.1999
PMCID: PMC96311
PMID: 9864230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


579. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2002 Jul;14(4):281-7. doi: 10.1177/104063870201400402.

A survey of agents associated with neonatal diarrhea in Iowa swine including 
Clostridium difficile and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus.

Yaeger M(1), Funk N, Hoffman L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production Animal Medicine, College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University, Ames 50011, USA.

This survey was undertaken to determine the relative frequency of agents that 
are currently associated with neonatal diarrhea in swine, including Clostridium 
difficile and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV). The 
subjects for this study were the first 100 live 1-7-day-old piglets submitted to 
the Iowa State University Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory with a clinical 
signalment of diarrhea, beginning on January 1, 2000. The evaluation of each pig 
included bacterial culture of a section of ileum, 2 sections of jejunum, and a 
single section of colon; a fluorescent antibody test (FAT) or 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV); 
ELISA's for rotavirus and C. difficile toxins; IHC for PRRSV; and microscopic 
examination of ileum, midjejunum, spiral colon, liver, spleen, and lung. Survey 
results demonstrate a decline in the relative number of diagnoses of TGEV, 
Escherichia coli, and Clostridium perfringens type C compared with retrospective 
data. The combined case frequency rate for these 3 pathogens dropped from 70% in 
1988 to 21% in 2000. This survey also demonstrated the emergence of C. difficile 
as an important pathogen of neonatal swine. Clostridium difficle toxin was 
detected in the colon contents of 29% of the piglets, and at least 1 
toxin-positive animal was identified in 55% of the cases. All 29 C. difficile 
toxin-positive piglets had mesocolonic edema, and colitis was observed in 21 of 
29 toxin-positive animals. PRRSV-positive macrophages were detected in the 
lamina propria of intestinal villi by IHC in 10 piglets with diarrhea. In 6 of 
these cases, PRRSV was the only pathogen detected. Gross and microscopic lung 
lesions were not a reliable indicator of PRRSV infection in these neonatal pigs 
with diarrhea. The addition of tests for C. difficile and PRRSV to a routine 
neonatal diarrhea diagnostic protocol resulted in a significant increase in 
thediagnostic success rate on both individual animal and case bases.

DOI: 10.1177/104063870201400402
PMID: 12152806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


580. BMC Microbiol. 2015 Feb 4;15(1):7. doi: 10.1186/s12866-015-0361-4.

High temporal resolution of glucosyltransferase dependent and independent 
effects of Clostridium difficile toxins across multiple cell types.

D'Auria KM(1), Bloom MJ(2)(3), Reyes Y(4), Gray MC(5), van Opstal EJ(6)(7), 
Papin JA(8), Hewlett EL(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, PO Box 800759, 
Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA. kd3jd@virginia.edu.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, PO Box 800759, 
Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA. mjb8vv@virginia.edu.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Medicine, University of Virginia, PO Box 801340, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, 
USA. mjb8vv@virginia.edu.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Medicine, University of Virginia, PO Box 801340, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, 
USA. yesenia.reyes@utdallas.edu.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Medicine, University of Virginia, PO Box 801340, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, 
USA. mrc6r@virginia.edu.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Medicine, University of Virginia, PO Box 801340, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, 
USA. edward.j.van.opstal@vanderbilt.edu.
(7)Current address: Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 340 Light Hall, 
Nashville, TN, 27232, USA. edward.j.van.opstal@vanderbilt.edu.
(8)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Virginia, PO Box 800759, 
Charlottesville, VA, 22908, USA. papin@virginia.edu.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases and International Health, Department of 
Medicine, University of Virginia, PO Box 801340, Charlottesville, VA, 22908, 
USA. eh2v@virginia.edu.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile toxins A and B (TcdA and TcdB), considered to 
be essential for C. difficile infection, affect the morphology of several cell 
types with different potencies and timing. However, morphological changes over 
various time scales are poorly characterized. The toxins' glucosyltransferase 
domains are critical to their deleterious effects, and cell responses to 
glucosyltransferase-independent activities are incompletely understood. By 
tracking morphological changes of multiple cell types to C. difficile toxins 
with high temporal resolution, cellular responses to TcdA, TcdB, and a 
glucosyltransferase-deficient TcdB (gdTcdB) are elucidated.
RESULTS: Human umbilical vein endothelial cells, J774 macrophage-like cells, and 
four epithelial cell lines (HCT8, T84, CHO, and immortalized mouse cecal 
epithelial cells) were treated with TcdA, TcdB, gdTcdB. Impedance across cell 
cultures was measured to track changes in cell morphology. Metrics from 
impedance data, developed to quantify rapid and long-lasting responses, produced 
standard curves with wide dynamic ranges that defined cell line sensitivities. 
Except for T84 cells, all cell lines were most sensitive to TcdB. J774 
macrophages stretched and increased in size in response to TcdA and TcdB but not 
gdTcdB. High concentrations of TcdB and gdTcdB (>10 ng/ml) greatly reduced 
macrophage viability. In HCT8 cells, gdTcdB did not induce a rapid cytopathic 
effect, yet it delayed TcdA and TcdB's rapid effects. gdTcdB did not clearly 
delay TcdA or TcdB's toxin-induced effects on macrophages.
CONCLUSIONS: Epithelial and endothelial cells have similar responses to toxins 
yet differ in timing and degree. Relative potencies of TcdA and TcdB in mouse 
epithelial cells in vitro do not correlate with potencies in vivo. TcdB requires 
glucosyltransferase activity to cause macrophages to spread, but cell death from 
high TcdB concentrations is glucosyltransferase-independent. Competition 
experiments with gdTcdB in epithelial cells confirm common TcdA and TcdB 
mechanisms, yet different responses of macrophages to TcdA and TcdB suggest 
different, additional mechanisms or targets in these cells. This first-time, 
precise quantification of the response of multiple cell lines to TcdA and TcdB 
provides a comparative framework for delineating the roles of different cell 
types and toxin-host interactions.

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-015-0361-4
PMCID: PMC4323251
PMID: 25648517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


581. Cell Rep. 2016 Feb 9;14(5):1049-1061. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.01.009. Epub 
2016 Jan 28.

Host-Microbiota Interactions in the Pathogenesis of Antibiotic-Associated 
Diseases.

Lichtman JS(1), Ferreyra JA(2), Ng KM(2), Smits SA(2), Sonnenburg JL(2), Elias 
JE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford School of Medicine, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94025, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford School of Medicine, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94025, USA.
(3)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford School of Medicine, 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94025, USA. Electronic address: 
josh.elias@stanford.edu.

Improved understanding of the interplay between host and microbes stands to 
illuminate new avenues for disease diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. Here, 
we provide a high-resolution view of the dynamics between host and gut 
microbiota during antibiotic-induced intestinal microbiota depletion, 
opportunistic Salmonella typhimurium and Clostridium difficile pathogenesis, and 
recovery from these perturbed states in a mouse model. Host-centric proteome and 
microbial community profiles provide a nuanced longitudinal view, revealing the 
interdependence between host and microbiota in evolving dysbioses. Time- and 
condition-specific molecular and microbial signatures are evident and clearly 
distinguished from pathogen-independent inflammatory fingerprints. Our data 
reveal that mice recovering from antibiotic treatment or C. difficile infection 
retain lingering signatures of inflammation, despite compositional normalization 
of the microbiota, and host responses could be rapidly and durably relieved 
through fecal transplant. These experiments demonstrate insights that emerge 
from the combination of these orthogonal, untargeted approaches to the 
gastrointestinal ecosystem.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.01.009
PMCID: PMC5372703
PMID: 26832403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


582. J Exp Med. 2020 Mar 2;217(3):jem.20190489. doi: 10.1084/jem.20190489.

Acetate coordinates neutrophil and ILC3 responses against C. difficile through 
FFAR2.

Fachi JL(1)(2), Sécca C(2), Rodrigues PB(1), Mato FCP(1), Di Luccia B(2), Felipe 
JS(1), Pral LP(1), Rungue M(3), Rocha VM(3), Sato FT(1), Sampaio U(4), Clerici 
MTPS(4), Rodrigues HG(5), Câmara NOS(6), Consonni SR(7), Vieira AT(3), Oliveira 
SC(3), Mackay CR(8), Layden BT(9)(10), Bortoluci KR(11), Colonna M(2), Vinolo 
MAR(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunoinflammation, Department of Genetics and Evolution, 
Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Biology, University of Campinas, 
Campinas, Brazil.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Saint Louis, MO.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences, 
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(4)Department of Food Technology, School of Food Engineering, University of 
Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Nutrients & Tissue Repair, School of Applied Sciences, 
University of Campinas, Limeira, Brazil.
(6)Department of Immunology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(7)Department of Biochemistry & Tissue Biology, Institute of Biology, University 
of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil.
(8)Department of Immunology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(9)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(10)Jesse Brown Veterans Medical Center, Chicago, IL.
(11)Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapy, Federal University of São Paulo, 
Vl Clementino, São Paulo, Brazil.
(12)Experimental Medicine Research Cluster, Campinas, Brazil.

Antibiotic-induced dysbiosis is a key predisposing factor for Clostridium 
difficile infections (CDIs), which cause intestinal disease ranging from mild 
diarrhea to pseudomembranous colitis. Here, we examined the impact of a 
microbiota-derived metabolite, short-chain fatty acid acetate, on an acute mouse 
model of CDI. We found that administration of acetate is remarkably beneficial 
in ameliorating disease. Mechanistically, we show that acetate enhances innate 
immune responses by acting on both neutrophils and ILC3s through its cognate 
receptor free fatty acid receptor 2 (FFAR2). In neutrophils, acetate-FFAR2 
signaling accelerates their recruitment to the inflammatory sites, facilitates 
inflammasome activation, and promotes the release of IL-1β; in ILC3s, 
acetate-FFAR2 augments expression of the IL-1 receptor, which boosts IL-22 
secretion in response to IL-1β. We conclude that microbiota-derived acetate 
promotes host innate responses to C. difficile through coordinate action on 
neutrophils and ILC3s.

© 2019 Fachi et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20190489
PMCID: PMC7062529
PMID: 31876919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors declare no competing 
interests exist.


583. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 20;104(12):5139-44. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0608197104. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

Crystal structures reveal a thiol protease-like catalytic triad in the 
C-terminal region of Pasteurella multocida toxin.

Kitadokoro K(1), Kamitani S, Miyazawa M, Hanajima-Ozawa M, Fukui A, Miyake M, 
Horiguchi Y.

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Low Temperature and Materials Sciences, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.

Pasteurella multocida toxin (PMT), one of the virulence factors produced by the 
bacteria, exerts its toxicity by up-regulating various signaling cascades 
downstream of the heterotrimeric GTPases Gq and G12/13 in an unknown fashion. 
Here, we present the crystal structure of the C-terminal region (residues 
575-1,285) of PMT, which carries an intracellularly active moiety. The overall 
structure of C-terminal region of PMT displays a Trojan horse-like shape, 
composed of three domains with a "feet"-,"body"-, and "head"-type arrangement, 
which were designated C1, C2, and C3 from the N to the C terminus, respectively. 
The C1 domain, showing marked similarity in steric structure to the N-terminal 
domain of Clostridium difficile toxin B, was found to lead the toxin molecule to 
the plasma membrane. The C3 domain possesses the Cys-His-Asp catalytic triad 
that is organized only when the Cys is released from a disulfide bond. The 
steric alignment of the triad corresponded well to that of papain or other 
enzymes carrying Cys-His-Asp. PMT toxicities on target cells were completely 
abrogated when one of the amino acids constituting the triad was mutated. Our 
results indicate that PMT is an enzyme toxin carrying the cysteine protease-like 
catalytic triad dependent on the redox state and functions on the cytoplasmic 
face of the plasma membrane of target cells.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0608197104
PMCID: PMC1829276
PMID: 17360394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


584. Dig Dis Sci. 1998 Sep;43(9):2055-60. doi: 10.1023/a:1018811331596.

Brewer's yeast and Saccharomyces boulardii both attenuate Clostridium 
difficile-induced colonic secretion in the rat.

Izadnia F(1), Wong CT, Kocoshis SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh and Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213-2583, USA.

Saccharomyces boulardii (Sb), a nonpathogenic yeast, has been used to prevent 
recurrences of Clostridium difficile (C.diff) -associated diarrhea. A single 
report suggested that treatment with Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sc), commonly 
called brewer's yeast (BY), facilitates treatment of persistent C.diff 
infection. We conducted this experiment to determine whether C.diff toxin 
A-induced colonic secretion in the rat is blunted by pretreatment with either Sb 
or BY. We employed closed cecal pouches in two groups of five adult male 
Sprague-Dawley rats fed with standard chow for five days prior to the 
experiment, another group whose water was supplemented with 20 x 10(9) 
colony-forming units (CFU) of Sb per day for five days, and another group whose 
water was supplemented with 20 x 10(9) CFU of Sc per day for five days. Cecal 
pouches were infused for 3 hr with one of the following: (1) normal saline alone 
for a control group, or (2) normal saline plus 5 microg of C.diff toxin A (for 
the other control group and for the two experimental groups). Water movement was 
measured by a nonabsorbable marker technique. Sodium movement and permeability 
to mannitol were also measured. Prior to the infusion, cecal contents were 
quantitatively cultured. In the three animals whose ceca were colonized with 
less than 10(6) CFU of either yeast per gram wet cecal content, toxin A-induced 
secretion could not be attenuated. In contrast, animals whose ceca were 
colonized with more than 10(6) CFU of either yeast per gram of wet cecal content 
showed significantly less secretion after toxin A application than those which 
were not fed yeast. S. cerevisiae reduced secretion by half (N = 5, P = 0.039 
for water, 0.044 for sodium) and Sb by 75% (N = 4, P = 0.015 for water, 0.034 
for sodium). Toxin-induced increases in permeability to [3H]mannitol from 
systemic circulation to cecum could not be blunted by either yeast. We conclude 
that rat ceca can be colonized by either organism and that both organisms reduce 
C.diff toxin A-mediated secretion. We speculate that both organisms might have 
benefit in human C.diff-associated enterocolitis. Further studies of their 
mechanisms of action as well as clinical trials for the prevention and treatment 
of human C.diff infections should be pursued.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1018811331596
PMID: 9753273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


585. J Biol Chem. 2016 Feb 12;291(7):3209-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.682856. Epub 2015 
Dec 11.

The Insect Peptide CopA3 Increases Colonic Epithelial Cell Proliferation and 
Mucosal Barrier Function to Prevent Inflammatory Responses in the Gut.

Kim DH(1), Hwang JS(2), Lee IH(1), Nam ST(1), Hong J(1), Zhang P(1), Lu LF(1), 
Lee J(3), Seok H(4), Pothoulakis C(5), Lamont JT(6), Kim H(7).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin 
University, Pocheon, Gyeonggido, 487-711, Republic of Korea.
(2)the Department of Agricultural Biology, National Academy of Agricultural 
Science, RDA, Wanju 55365, Republic of Korea.
(3)the Department of Pathology, Daejeon St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Daeheung-ro 64, Jung-gu, Daejeon 
301-723, Republic of Korea.
(4)the Department of Biomedical Engineering, Jungwon University, Goesan, 
Chungcheongbukdo, 367-700, South Korea.
(5)the Division of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, and.
(6)the Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115.
(7)From the Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin 
University, Pocheon, Gyeonggido, 487-711, Republic of Korea, hokim@daejin.ac.kr.

The epithelial cells of the gut form a physical barrier against the luminal 
contents. The collapse of this barrier causes inflammation, and its therapeutic 
restoration can protect the gut against inflammation. EGF enhances mucosal 
barrier function and increases colonocyte proliferation, thereby ameliorating 
inflammatory responses in the gut. Based on our previous finding that the insect 
peptide CopA3 promotes neuronal growth, we herein tested whether CopA3 could 
increase the cell proliferation of colonocytes, enhance mucosal barrier 
function, and ameliorate gut inflammation. Our results revealed that CopA3 
significantly increased epithelial cell proliferation in mouse colonic crypts 
and also enhanced colonic epithelial barrier function. Moreover, CopA3 treatment 
ameliorated Clostridium difficile toxin As-induced inflammation responses in the 
mouse small intestine (acute enteritis) and completely blocked inflammatory 
responses and subsequent lethality in the dextran sulfate sodium-induced mouse 
model of chronic colitis. The marked CopA3-induced increase of colonocyte 
proliferation was found to require rapid protein degradation of p21(Cip1/Waf1), 
and an in vitro ubiquitination assay revealed that CopA3 directly facilitated 
ubiquitin ligase activity against p21(Cip1/Waf1). Taken together, our findings 
indicate that the insect peptide CopA3 prevents gut inflammation by increasing 
epithelial cell proliferation and mucosal barrier function.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.682856
PMCID: PMC4751369
PMID: 26655716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


586. Am J Physiol. 1990 Aug;259(2 Pt 1):G165-72. doi: 10.1152/ajpgi.1990.259.2.G165.

C. difficile toxin A increases intestinal permeability and induces Cl- 
secretion.

Moore R(1), Pothoulakis C, LaMont JT, Carlson S, Madara JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston 02115.

Mucosal sheets of guinea pig ileum mounted in Ussing chambers were used to 
determine effects of highly purified Clostridium difficile toxin A on intestinal 
structure and barrier function in the absence of recruited neutrophils and blood 
flow. With the use of standard electrophysiological and morphological 
techniques, our results indicate that 5 micrograms/ml mucosal toxin A induces 
substantial alteration in epithelial permeability and in structure of absorptive 
cells. Transepithelial fluxes of mannitol (3.6 A) and inulin (11.5 A) increased 
20-80 min after toxin A exposure (63 +/- 13 vs. 149 +/- 14 and 2.33 +/- 0.43 vs. 
7.03 +/- 1.0 nmol.cm-2.h-1 for mannitol and inulin; controls vs. toxin exposed, 
respectively, both P less than 0.01). Toxin A exposure diminished short-circuit 
current (153 +/- 8 vs. 77 +/- 6 microA/cm2 for control and toxin exposed, 
respectively, P less than 0.001), decreased transepithelial electrical 
resistance (61.6 +/- 3 vs. 50.1 +/- 3.9 omega.cm2 for control and toxin exposed, 
respectively, P less than 0.05), increased passive permeation of Na+ (19.1 +/- 
0.9 vs. 27.4 +/- 0.9 mumol.cm-2.h-1 for control and toxin exposed, 
respectively), and induced a Cl- secretory response (net flux 3.65 +/- 3.0 vs. 
-4.62 +/- 2.6 mumol.cm-2.h-1, for control and toxin exposed, respectively, P 
less than 0.05) over the 2-h experimental time course. Toxin A-induced 
structural alterations of villus tip absorptive cells were strikingly similar to 
those induced by the actin-binding agent cytochalasin D. Specifically, cells 
displayed constricted subjunctional zones, flared microvillus brush borders, 
condensation of microfilaments in the zone of the perijunctional actomyosin 
ring, and breakdown of intercellular tight junctions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.1990.259.2.G165
PMID: 2116728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


587. J Clin Invest. 1995 Mar;95(3):1026-31. doi: 10.1172/JCI117747.

The low molecular mass GTP-binding protein Rho is affected by toxin A from 
Clostridium difficile.

Just I(1), Selzer J, von Eichel-Streiber C, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universität des Saarlandes, 
Homburg, Germany.

Enterotoxin A is one of the major virulence factors of Clostridium difficile, 
and the causative agent of antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis. In 
cell culture (NIH-3T3, rat basophilic leukemia cells) toxin A inhibits 
Clostridium botulinum ADP-ribosyltransferase C3 (C3)-catalyzed ADP-ribosylation 
of the low molecular mass GTP-binding Rho proteins. Rho participates in the 
regulation of the microfilament cytoskeleton. Decrease in ADP-ribosylation of 
Rho occurs in a time- and concentration-dependent manner and precedes the toxin 
A-induced destruction of the actin cytoskeleton. Action of toxin A is not due to 
proteolytical degradation of Rho or to an inherent ADP-ribosyltransferase 
activity of toxin A. Toxin A-induced decrease in ADP-ribosylation is observed 
also in cell lysates and with recombinant RhoA protein. A heat stable low 
molecular mass cytosolic factor is essential for the toxin effect on Rho. Thus, 
the enterotoxin (toxin A) resembles the effects of the C. difficile cytotoxin 
(toxin B) on Rho proteins (Just, I., G. Fritz, K. Aktories, M. Giry, M. R. 
Popoff, P. Boquet, S. Hegenbath, and C. Von Eichel-Streiber. 1994. J. Biol. 
Chem. 269:10706-10712). The data indicate that despite different in vivo 
effects, toxin A and toxin B act on the same cellular target protein Rho to 
elicit their toxic effects.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI117747
PMCID: PMC441436
PMID: 7883950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


588. Acta Physiol Scand. 2003 Jul;178(3):241-50. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-201X.2003.01144.x.

Involvement of enteric nerves in permeability changes due to deoxycholic acid in 
rat jejunum in vivo.

Fihn BM(1), Sjöqvist A, Jodal M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Göteborg, Göteborg, Sweden.

AIM: Stress and Clostridium difficile toxin A increase epithelial permeability 
in the small intestine via vagus and visceral afferents, in turn activating 
mucosal mast cells. Bile acids also increase epithelial permeability but it is 
not known if nerves or mast cells are involved in this effect in the small 
intestine.
METHOD: In jejunum of anesthetized rats, the effects of hexamethonium and 
atropine on deoxycholic acid (DCA) induced fluid secretion and increase in 
epithelial permeability was therefore studied by determining the appearance and 
disappearance rates of 14C-mannitol and 51Cr-EDTA into and from a perfusion 
system containing 4 or 8 mm DCA and expressed as clearance.
RESULTS: DCA increased net fluid transport and appearance and to a less extent 
disappearance rates of the probes. Hexamethonium but not atropine, chronic 
denervation or the NO synthase inhibitor L-NNA did significantly decrease the 
appearance rate and net fluid secretion. The levels of the mast cell protease II 
(RMCP II) in perfusate and plasma were not increased by DCA. The clearance ratio 
Cr-EDTA/mannitol indicates that the plasma clearance of the permeability probes 
is partly secondary to net fluid transport only at higher DCA concentrations.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the DCA effect on epithelial permeability is to a 
large part induced by intramural reflex(es) containing nicotinic receptors. The 
results also suggest that mast cell degranulation and NO release are not 
involved in the mechanism. This indicates that the nerve effect on intestinal 
paracellular permeability is not mediated by the mechanisms described for stress 
or Clostridium difficile toxin A.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-201X.2003.01144.x
PMID: 12823182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


589. J Clin Microbiol. 2009 Feb;47(2):373-8. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01613-08. Epub 2008 Dec 
10.

Comparison of a commercial real-time PCR assay for tcdB detection to a cell 
culture cytotoxicity assay and toxigenic culture for direct detection of 
toxin-producing Clostridium difficile in clinical samples.

Stamper PD(1), Alcabasa R, Aird D, Babiker W, Wehrlin J, Ikpeama I, Carroll KC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Medical Microbiology, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Rapid detection of toxin-producing strains of Clostridium difficile is essential 
for optimal management of patients with C. difficile infection. The BD GeneOhm 
(San Diego, CA) Cdiff assay, a real-time PCR assay that amplifies tcdB, was 
compared to a cell culture neutralization assay (Wampole C. difficile Toxin B 
[TOX-B] test; TechLab, Blacksburg, VA) and to toxigenic culture. Using liquid (n 
= 273) and soft (n = 131) stool specimens from 377 symptomatic patients, all 
testing was performed on the same day by independent laboratory staff according 
to the manufacturers' protocols. Toxigenic bacterial culture was performed as 
follows. A 0.5-ml aliquot of stool was heated to 80 degrees C for 10 min, 
followed by inoculation onto modified cycloserine cefoxitin fructose agar with 
and without horse blood (Remel, Lenexa, KS) and into prereduced chopped-meat 
broth. Of the 404 stool specimens tested, 340 were negative and 40 were positive 
(10.0% prevalence) both by PCR for tcdB and by cytotoxin production. The overall 
agreement between the BD GeneOhm Cdiff assay and the TOX-B test was 94.8% 
(380/401). When the TOX-B test was used as the reference method, the initial 
sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of the BD 
GeneOhm Cdiff assay were 90.9% (40/44), 95.2% (340/357), 70.2% (40/57), and 
98.8% (340/344), respectively. When toxigenic culture was used as the "gold 
standard," the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive 
values of the BD GeneOhm Cdiff assay were 83.6%, 98.2%, 89.5%, and 97.1%, 
respectively, and those of the TOX-B test were 67.2%, 99.1%, 93.2%, and 94.4%, 
respectively. PCRs for three samples were inhibited upon initial testing; one 
sample was resolved upon retesting. One sample produced nonspecific cytotoxin 
results. The BD GeneOhm Cdiff assay performed well compared to a standard cell 
culture neutralization assay and to toxigenic culture for the detection of 
toxigenic C. difficile directly from fecal specimens.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01613-08
PMCID: PMC2643696
PMID: 19073875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


590. J Clin Microbiol. 2009 Dec;47(12):3846-50. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01490-09. Epub 2009 
Oct 21.

Evaluation of a new commercial TaqMan PCR assay for direct detection of the 
clostridium difficile toxin B gene in clinical stool specimens.

Stamper PD(1), Babiker W, Alcabasa R, Aird D, Wehrlin J, Ikpeama I, Gluck L, 
Carroll KC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Pathology, the Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The ProGastro Cd assay (Prodesse, Inc., Waukesha, WI) is a new commercial TaqMan 
PCR assay that detects tcdB. The ProGastro Cd assay was compared to the Wampole 
Clostridium difficile toxin B test (TOX-B test; TechLab, Blacksburg, VA), a cell 
culture cytotoxicity neutralization assay (CCCNA), and to anaerobic toxigenic 
bacterial culture, as the "gold standard," for 285 clinical stool specimens. 
Assays were independently performed according to manufacturers' directions. A 
1.0-ml sample was removed from the stool specimen, of which 20 microl was used 
for extraction on the NucliSENS easyMAG platform (bioMérieux, Inc., Durham, NC) 
for the Prodesse ProGastro Cd assay and 200 microl of the stool filtrate was 
used for the TOX-B CCCNA. Anaerobic toxigenic culture was done by heating an 
additional 1.0 ml of the stool sample to 80 degrees C for 10 min before 
inoculation onto modified cycloserine, cefoxitin, and fructose agar with horse 
blood (Remel, Lenexa, KS) and into a prereduced chopped meat glucose broth (BBL, 
BD Diagnostics, Sparks, MD). The prevalence of toxin-producing strains of C. 
difficile was 15.7% (n = 44) as determined by anaerobic toxigenic culture. The 
sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of the 
Prodesse ProGastro Cd assay compared to the TOX-B test were 83.3%, 95.6%, 69.4%, 
and 98%, respectively. Compared to toxigenic culture, the sensitivity, 
specificity, and positive and negative predictive values of the Prodesse 
ProGastro Cd assay were 77.3%, 99.2%, 94.4%, and 95.9%, respectively, and those 
of the TOX-B test were 63.6%, 99.2%, 93.3%, and 93.6%, respectively. Although no 
statistical difference (Fisher's exact test) was detected (P = 0.242) between 
the sensitivities of the Prodesse ProGastro Cd assay and a standard CCCNA 
compared to anaerobic culture for the detection of toxigenic C. difficile, the 
Prodesse ProGastro Cd assay did detect more toxigenic C. difficile isolates than 
the CCCNA.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01490-09
PMCID: PMC2786685
PMID: 19846637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


591. mBio. 2017 Aug 8;8(4):e00885-17. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00885-17.

Pathogenicity Locus, Core Genome, and Accessory Gene Contributions to 
Clostridium difficile Virulence.

Lewis BB(1)(2), Carter RA(1), Ling L(2), Leiner I(1), Taur Y(1)(3), Kamboj M(4), 
Dubberke ER(5), Xavier J(6), Pamer EG(7)(2)(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Center for Microbes, Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Infection Control, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA.
(6)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Infectious Disease Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA pamere@mskcc.org.
(8)Immunology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, New York, USA.

Clostridium difficile is a spore-forming anaerobic bacterium that causes colitis 
in patients with disrupted colonic microbiota. While some individuals are 
asymptomatic C. difficile carriers, symptomatic disease ranges from mild 
diarrhea to potentially lethal toxic megacolon. The wide disease spectrum has 
been attributed to the infected host's age, underlying diseases, immune status, 
and microbiome composition. However, strain-specific differences in C. difficile 
virulence have also been implicated in determining colitis severity. Because 
patients infected with C. difficile are unique in terms of medical history, 
microbiome composition, and immune competence, determining the relative 
contribution of C. difficile virulence to disease severity has been challenging, 
and conclusions regarding the virulence of specific strains have been 
inconsistent. To address this, we used a mouse model to test 33 clinical 
C. difficile strains isolated from patients with disease severities ranging from 
asymptomatic carriage to severe colitis, and we determined their relative in 
vivo virulence in genetically identical, antibiotic-pretreated mice. We found 
that murine infections with C. difficile clade 2 strains (including multilocus 
sequence type 1/ribotype 027) were associated with higher lethality and that 
C. difficile strains associated with greater human disease severity caused more 
severe disease in mice. While toxin production was not strongly correlated with 
in vivo colonic pathology, the ability of C. difficile strains to grow in the 
presence of secondary bile acids was associated with greater disease severity. 
Whole-genome sequencing and identification of core and accessory genes 
identified a subset of accessory genes that distinguish high-virulence from 
lower-virulence C. difficile strains.IMPORTANCEClostridium difficile is an 
important cause of hospital-associated intestinal infections, and recent years 
have seen an increase in the number and severity of cases in the United States. 
A patient's antibiotic history, immune status, and medical comorbidities 
determine, in part, the severity of C. difficile infection. The relative 
virulence of different clinical C. difficile strains, although postulated to 
determine disease severity in patients, has been more difficult to consistently 
associate with mild versus severe colitis. We tested 33 distinct clinical 
C. difficile isolates for their ability to cause disease in genetically 
identical mice and found that C. difficile strains belonging to clade 2 were 
associated with higher mortality. Differences in survival were not attributed to 
differences in toxin production but likely resulted from the distinct gene 
content in the various clinical isolates.

Copyright © 2017 Lewis et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00885-17
PMCID: PMC5550754
PMID: 28790208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


592. Infect Immun. 2012 Dec;80(12):4463-73. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00782-12. Epub 2012 Oct 
8.

Contribution of adenosine A(2B) receptors in Clostridium difficile intoxication 
and infection.

Warren CA(1), Li Y, Calabrese GM, Freire RS, Zaja-Milatovic S, van Opstal E, 
Figler RA, Linden J, Guerrant RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, 
USA. ca6t@virginia.edu

Clostridium difficile toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB) induce a pronounced systemic 
and intestinal inflammatory response. A(2B) adenosine receptors (A(2B)ARs) are 
the predominant adenosine receptors in the intestinal epithelium. We 
investigated whether A(2B)ARs are upregulated in human intestinal cells by TcdA 
or TcdB and whether blockade of A(2B)ARs can ameliorate C. difficile 
TcdA-induced enteritis and alter the outcome of C. difficile infection (CDI). 
Adenosine receptor subtype (A(1), A(2A), A(2B), and A(3)) mRNAs were assayed in 
HCT-8 cells. Ileal loops from wild-type rabbits and mice and A(2B)AR(-/-) mice 
were treated with TcdA, with or without the selective A(2B)AR antagonist ATL692 
or PSB1115. A murine model of CDI was used to determine the effect of A(2B)AR 
deletion or blockade with the orally available agent ATL801, on clinical 
outcome, histopathology and intestinal interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression from 
infection. TcdA and TcdB upregulated A(2B)AR gene expression in HCT-8 cells. 
ATL692 decreased TcdA-induced secretion and epithelial injury in rabbit ileum. 
Deletion of A(2B)ARs reduced secretion and histopathology in TcdA-challenged 
mouse ileum. Deletion or blockade of A(2B)ARs reduced histopathology, IL-6 
expression, weight loss, diarrhea, and mortality in C. difficile-infected mice. 
A(2B)ARs mediate C. difficile toxin-induced enteritis and disease. Inhibition of 
A(2B)AR activation may be a potential strategy to limit morbidity and mortality 
from CDI.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00782-12
PMCID: PMC3497433
PMID: 23045479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


593. J Surg Res. 2001 May 1;97(1):97-102. doi: 10.1006/jsre.2001.6130.

Clostridium difficile toxins and enterococcal translocation in vivo and in 
vitro.

Feltis BA(1), Garni RM, Wells CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, 
USA. felti001@tc.umn.edu

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile toxins alter permeability in cultured 
enterocytes and may alter intestinal epithelial permeability to bacteria in 
vivo. Experiments were designed to test the effects of C. difficile toxins on in 
vitro interactions of Enterococcus gallinarum with cultured enterocytes, as well 
as on translocation of E. gallinarum in mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mature Caco-2 and HT-29 enterocytes were pretreated with 
C. difficile toxin A or toxin B followed by incubation with E. gallinarum. E. 
gallinarum-enterocyte interactions were assessed by quantitative culture. For in 
vivo experiments, antibiotic-treated mice were orally inoculated with C. 
difficile or saline, and all mice were orally inoculated 24 h later with E. 
gallinarum and sacrificed after another 24 h for analysis of cecal bacteria, 
cecal C. difficile toxin, and enterococcal translocation. Cecal C. difficile 
toxin was assayed as cytopathic effects on human foreskin fibroblasts.
RESULTS: Although neither toxin had a noticeable effect on bacterial 
internalization by cultured enterocytes, C. difficile toxins were associated 
with increased E. gallinarum transmigration across confluent enterocyte 
cultures. Mice orally inoculated with saline rather than C. difficile (n = 29) 
had no detectable cecal toxin, while mice orally inoculated with C. difficile (n 
= 30) had detectable cecal toxin. Viable E. gallinarum was recovered from the 
mesenteric lymph nodes of 97% of mice orally inoculated with saline followed by 
oral E. gallinarum, but only 37% of mice orally inoculated with C. difficile 
followed by oral E. gallinarum (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that observations with cultured 
enterocytes, demonstrating that C. difficile toxins facilitated bacterial 
migration across the intestinal epithelium, might have little in vivo relevance 
in a mouse model of antibiotic-induced C. difficile overgrowth.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jsre.2001.6130
PMID: 11319888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


594. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 31;10(7):e0134849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134849. 
eCollection 2015.

Systems Modeling of Interactions between Mucosal Immunity and the Gut Microbiome 
during Clostridium difficile Infection.

Leber A(1), Viladomiu M(1), Hontecillas R(1), Abedi V(1), Philipson C(1), Hoops 
S(1), Howard B(2), Bassaganya-Riera J(1).

Author information:
(1)The Center for Modeling Immunity to Enteric Pathogens, Virginia 
Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of 
America; Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine Laboratory 
(www.nimml.org), Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, 
Virginia, United States of America.
(2)Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine Laboratory (www.nimml.org), 
Virginia Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United 
States of America; Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Bioinformatics 
Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of America.

Clostridium difficile infections are associated with the use of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics and result in an exuberant inflammatory response, leading to 
nosocomial diarrhea, colitis and even death. To better understand the dynamics 
of mucosal immunity during C. difficile infection from initiation through 
expansion to resolution, we built a computational model of the mucosal immune 
response to the bacterium. The model was calibrated using data from a mouse 
model of C. difficile infection. The model demonstrates a crucial role of T 
helper 17 (Th17) effector responses in the colonic lamina propria and luminal 
commensal bacteria populations in the clearance of C. difficile and colonic 
pathology, whereas regulatory T (Treg) cells responses are associated with the 
recovery phase. In addition, the production of anti-microbial peptides by 
inflamed epithelial cells and activated neutrophils in response to C. difficile 
infection inhibit the re-growth of beneficial commensal bacterial species. 
Computational simulations suggest that the removal of neutrophil and epithelial 
cell derived anti-microbial inhibitions, separately and together, on commensal 
bacterial regrowth promote recovery and minimize colonic inflammatory pathology. 
Simulation results predict a decrease in colonic inflammatory markers, such as 
neutrophilic influx and Th17 cells in the colonic lamina propria, and length of 
infection with accelerated commensal bacteria re-growth through altered 
anti-microbial inhibition. Computational modeling provides novel insights on the 
therapeutic value of repopulating the colonic microbiome and inducing regulatory 
mucosal immune responses during C. difficile infection. Thus, modeling mucosal 
immunity-gut microbiota interactions has the potential to guide the development 
of targeted fecal transplantation therapies in the context of precision medicine 
interventions.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134849
PMCID: PMC4521955
PMID: 26230099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


595. Infect Immun. 2019 Dec 17;88(1):e00306-19. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00306-19. Print 2019 
Dec 17.

Type 3 Immunity during Clostridioides difficile Infection: Too Much of a Good 
Thing?

Saleh MM(1), Petri WA Jr(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of 
Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology, University of 
Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA wap3g@virginia.edu.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Virginia Health System, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health System, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

Clostridioides (formerly known as Clostridium) difficile is the leading cause of 
hospital-acquired gastrointestinal infections in the United States and one of 
three urgent health care threats identified by the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. C. difficile disease is mediated by the production of toxins 
that disrupt the epithelial barrier and cause a robust host inflammatory 
response. Studies in humans as well as animal models of disease have shown that 
the type of immune response generated against the infection dictates the outcome 
of disease, often irrespective of bacterial burden. Much of the focus on 
immunity during C. difficile infection (CDI) has been on type 3 immunity because 
of the established role for this arm of the immune system in other 
gastrointestinal inflammatory conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease 
(IBD). For example, interleukin-22 (IL-22) production by group 3 innate lymphoid 
cells (ILC3s) protects against pathobionts translocating across the epithelium 
during CDI. On the other hand, interleukin-17 (IL-17) production by Th17 cells 
increases CDI-associated mortality. Additionally, neutropenia has been 
associated with increased susceptibility to CDI in humans, but increased 
neutrophilia in mouse models correlates with host pathology. Taking the data 
together, these findings suggest dual roles for type 3 immune responses during 
infection. Here, we review the complex role of type 3 immunity during CDI and 
delineate what is known about innate and adaptive cellular immunity as well as 
the downstream effector cytokines known to be important during this infection.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00306-19
PMCID: PMC6921663
PMID: 31570564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


596. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 30;8(8):e72620. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072620. 
eCollection 2013.

Fate of ingested Clostridium difficile spores in mice.

Howerton A(1), Patra M, Abel-Santos E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Nevada - Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada, 
United States of America.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a leading cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, a major nosocomial complication. The infective 
form of C. difficile is the spore, a dormant and resistant structure that forms 
under stress. Although spore germination is the first committed step in CDI 
onset, the temporal and spatial distribution of ingested C. difficile spores is 
not clearly understood. We recently reported that CamSA, a synthetic bile salt 
analog, inhibits C. difficile spore germination in vitro and in vivo. In this 
study, we took advantage of the anti-germination activity of bile salts to 
determine the fate of ingested C. difficile spores. We tested four different 
bile salts for efficacy in preventing CDI. Since CamSA was the only 
anti-germinant tested able to prevent signs of CDI, we characterized CamSa's in 
vitro stability, distribution, and cytotoxicity. We report that CamSA is stable 
to simulated gastrointestinal (GI) environments, but will be degraded by members 
of the natural microbiota found in a healthy gut. Our data suggest that CamSA 
will not be systemically available, but instead will be localized to the GI 
tract. Since in vitro pharmacological parameters were acceptable, CamSA was used 
to probe the mouse model of CDI. By varying the timing of CamSA dosage, we 
estimated that C. difficile spores germinated and established infection less 
than 10 hours after ingestion. We also showed that ingested C. difficile spores 
rapidly transited through the GI tract and accumulated in the colon and cecum of 
CamSA-treated mice. From there, C. difficile spores were slowly shed over a 
96-hour period. To our knowledge, this is the first report of using molecular 
probes to obtain disease progression information for C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072620
PMCID: PMC3758320
PMID: 24023628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: EAS received a grant from 
the National Science Foundation (grant number 0957400). These funds partially 
paid for this work. Materials described in this manuscript have been submitted 
for protection by a provisional patent application. A Provisional Patent 
entitled “Reducing Risk of Contracting Clostridium difficile Associated Disease” 
was filed on 8/13/2012 with the USPTO. The Application Number is 61682505. This 
patent application does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials.


597. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2018 Dec 12;7(1):211. doi: 10.1038/s41426-018-0211-1.

Characterization of the virulence of a non-RT027, non-RT078 and binary 
toxin-positive Clostridium difficile strain associated with severe diarrhea.

Li C(1)(2), Harmanus C(3), Zhu D(2), Meng X(1), Wang S(2), Duan J(1), Liu S(1), 
Fu C(1), Zhou P(1), Liu R(1), Wu A(1), Kuijper EJ(3), Smits WK(3), Fu L(4), Sun 
X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infection Control Center of Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, 410008, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. Down Blvd, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease of Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, 410008, China. fulei92@126.com.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of 
South Florida, 12901 Bruce B. Down Blvd, Tampa, FL, 33612, USA. 
sun5@health.usf.edu.

The expression of the Clostridium difficile binary toxin CDT is generally 
observed in the RT027 (ST1) and RT078 (ST11) C. difficile isolates, which are 
associated with severe C. difficile infection (CDI). However, we recently 
reported that the non-RT027 and non-RT078 C. difficile strain LC693 (TcdA+TcdB+ 
CDT+, ST201) caused severe diarrhea in a patient in Xiangya Hospital in China. 
C.difficile LC693 is a member of Clade 3, and in this study, we identified LC693 
as RT871 and compared its virulence and pathogenicity to those of C.difficile 
R20291 (TcdA+TcdB+CDT+, ST1/RT027), UK6 (TcdA+TcdB+CDT+, ST35/RT027), CD630 
(TcdA+TcdB+CDT-, ST54, RT012), and 1379 (TcdA+TcdB+CDT-, ST54/RT012), with 
strain 1379 being an epidemic C.difficile isolate from the same hospital. LC693 
displayed a higher sporulation rate than R20291, CD630 or strain 1379. LC693 was 
comparable to R20291 with respect to spore germination, motility, and biofilm 
formation, but showed a faster germination rate, higher motility and a higher 
biofilm formation capability compared to CD630 and strain 1379. The adherence of 
spores to human gut epithelial cells was similar for all strains.The total toxin 
release of LC693 was lower than that of R20291, but higher than that of CD630 
and strain 1379. Finally, in a mouse model of CDI, LC693 was capable of causing 
moderate to severe disease. Our findings demonstrate the pathogenicity of 
non-RT027 and non-RT078 binary toxin-positive C. difficile strains. Furthermore, 
our data indicate that LC693 may be more virulent than strain 1379, an epidemic 
strain from the same hospital, and provide the first phenotypic characterization 
of a non-RT027 and non-RT078 binary toxin-positive ST201 isolate.

DOI: 10.1038/s41426-018-0211-1
PMCID: PMC6291415
PMID: 30542069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


598. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2011 Oct;55(10):4850-7. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00177-11. 
Epub 2011 Aug 1.

The insect peptide coprisin prevents Clostridium difficile-mediated acute 
inflammation and mucosal damage through selective antimicrobial activity.

Kang JK(1), Hwang JS, Nam HJ, Ahn KJ, Seok H, Kim SK, Yun EY, Pothoulakis C, 
Lamont JT, Kim H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Daejin University, 
Pocheon, Gyeonggido, South Korea.

Clostridium difficile-associated diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis are 
typically treated with vancomycin or metronidazole, but recent increases in 
relapse incidence and the emergence of drug-resistant strains of C. difficile 
indicate the need for new antibiotics. We previously isolated coprisin, an 
antibacterial peptide from Copris tripartitus, a Korean dung beetle, and 
identified a nine-amino-acid peptide in the α-helical region of it (LLCIALRKK) 
that had antimicrobial activity (J.-S. Hwang et al., Int. J. Pept., 2009, 
doi:10.1155/2009/136284). Here, we examined whether treatment with a coprisin 
analogue (a disulfide dimer of the nine peptides) prevented inflammation and 
mucosal damage in a mouse model of acute gut inflammation established by 
administration of antibiotics followed by C. difficile infection. In this model, 
coprisin treatment significantly ameliorated body weight decreases, improved the 
survival rate, and decreased mucosal damage and proinflammatory cytokine 
production. In contrast, the coprisin analogue had no apparent antibiotic 
activity against commensal bacteria, including Lactobacillus and 
Bifidobacterium, which are known to inhibit the colonization of C. difficile. 
The exposure of C. difficile to the coprisin analogue caused a marked increase 
in nuclear propidium iodide (PI) staining, indicating membrane damage; the 
staining levels were similar to those seen with bacteria treated with a positive 
control for membrane disruption (EDTA). In contrast, coprisin analogue treatment 
did not trigger increases in the nuclear PI staining of Bifidobacterium 
thermophilum. This observation suggests that the antibiotic activity of the 
coprisin analogue may occur through specific membrane disruption of C. 
difficile. Thus, these results indicate that the coprisin analogue may prove 
useful as a therapeutic agent for C. difficile infection-associated inflammatory 
diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00177-11
PMCID: PMC3186999
PMID: 21807975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


599. J Med Microbiol. 2011 Aug;60(Pt 8):1155-1161. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.029553-0. Epub 
2011 Feb 24.

Role of fibronectin-binding protein A in Clostridium difficile intestinal 
colonization.

Barketi-Klai A(1), Hoys S(1), Lambert-Bordes S(1), Collignon A(1), Kansau I(1).

Author information:
(1)EA 4043, USC INRA 'Ecosystème microbien digestif et santé', Faculté de 
Pharmacie, Université Paris-Sud 11, Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Clostridium difficile is a frequent cause of severe, recurrent, post-antibiotic 
diarrhoea and pseudomembranous colitis. Its pathogenicity is mediated mainly by 
two toxins, TcdA and TcdB. However, different adhesins have also been described 
as important colonization factors which are implicated in the first step of the 
intestinal infection. In this study, we focused our interest on one of these 
adhesins, fibronectin-binding protein A (FbpA), and on its role in the 
intestinal colonization process. A mutant of FbpA (CDΔFbpA) was constructed in 
C. difficile strain 630Δerm by using ClosTron technology. This mutant was 
characterized in vitro and in vivo and compared to the isogenic wild-type 
strain. Adhesion of the CDΔFbpA mutant to the human colonic epithelial cell line 
Caco-2 and to mucus-secreting HT29-MTX cells was examined. Surprisingly, the 
CDΔFbpA mutant adhered more than the wild-type parental strain. The CDΔFbpA 
mutant was also analysed in three different mouse models by following the 
intestinal implantation kinetics (faecal shedding) and caecal colonization (7 
days post-challenge). We showed that in monoxenic mice, CDΔFbpA shed C. 
difficile in faeces at the same rate as that of the isogenic wild-type strain 
but its colonization of the caecal wall was significantly reduced. In dixenic 
mice, the shedding rate was slower for the CDΔFbpA mutant than for the isogenic 
wild-type strain during the first days of infection, but no significant 
difference was observed in caecal colonization. Similar rates of intestinal 
implantation and caecal colonization were observed for both strains in assays 
performed in human microbiota-associated mice. Taken together, our data suggest 
that FbpA plays a role in intestinal colonization by C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.029553-0
PMID: 21349990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


600. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003 Oct;285(4):C935-44. doi: 
10.1152/ajpcell.00069.2003. Epub 2003 Jun 4.

Hypotonicity induces membrane protrusions and actin remodeling via activation of 
small GTPases Rac and Cdc42 in Rat-1 fibroblasts.

Carton I(1), Hermans D, Eggermont J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Physiology, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Campus 
Gasthuisberg, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

An important consequence of cell swelling is the reorganization of the F-actin 
cytoskeleton in different cell types. We demonstrate in this study by means of 
rhodamine-phalloidin labeling and fluorescence microscopy that a drastic 
reorganization of F-actin occurs in swollen Rat-1 fibroblasts: stress fibers 
disappear and F-actin patches are formed in peripheral extensions at the cell 
border. Moreover, we demonstrate that activation of both Rac and Cdc42, members 
of the family of small Rho GTPases, forms the link between the hypotonic 
stimulation and F-actin reorganization. Indeed, inhibition of the small GTPases 
RhoA, Rac, and Cdc42 (by Clostridium difficile toxin B) prevents the 
hypotonicity-induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, whereas 
inhibition of RhoA alone (by C. limosum C3 exoenzyme) does not preclude this 
rearrangement. Second, a direct activation and translocation toward the actin 
patches underneath the plasma membrane is observed for endogenous Rac and Cdc42 
(but not for RhoA) during cell swelling. Finally, transfection of Rat-1 
fibroblasts with constitutively active RhoA, dominant negative Rac, or dominant 
negative Cdc42 abolishes the swelling-induced actin reorganization. 
Interestingly, application of cRGD, a competitor peptide for 
fibronectin-integrin association, induces identical membrane protrusions and 
changes in the F-actin cytoskeleton that are also inhibited by C. difficile 
toxin B and dominant negative Rac or Cdc42. Moreover, cRGD also induces a 
redistribution of endogenous Rac and Cdc42 to the newly formed submembranous 
F-actin patches. We therefore conclude that hypotonicity and cRGD remodel the 
F-actin cytoskeleton in Rat-1 fibroblasts in a Rac/Cdc42-dependent way.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00069.2003
PMID: 12788692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


601. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper. 1998 Jul-Aug;74(7-8):67-74.

Modulation between aerobic and anaerobic metabolism in the mutant cell line 
CdtR-Q.

Lofrumento DD(1), Panaro MA, Mitolo V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Bari.

It has recently been shown that the cell line Don Q obtained by mutagenesis of 
wild type Chinese hamster lung fibroblasts (Don wt), presents a point mutation 
in the gene coding for UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase. The persistent low level 
of UDP-glucose makes Don Q clone resistant to Clostridium difficile toxin B. 
Starting from the observation that Don Q cells exhibit many large hydrophobic 
cytoplasmic inclusions, that we have found to be made of neutral lipids, the 
aerobic metabolism of the two cell lines has been examined. The specific 
activity of cytochrome oxidase in Don Q cells is more than 5 times lower than 
that found in Don wt. Also, the activity of Complexes II + III, expressed by the 
activity of succinate-cytochrome c oxido-reductase, has been found to be lower 
in Don Q compared to wt cells. On the other hand, NADH-cytochrome c 
oxido-reductase activity, insensitive to rotenone, is more than doubled in Don 
Q. In these cells the activity of lactate dehydrogenase is very high, being able 
to oxidise more than 3,000 nmoles of NADH/min/mg of protein. The results 
obtained indicate that Don Q cells, in addition to a decreased ability to 
synthesise UDP-glucose, have an impairment in the respiratory chain. Such an 
impairment could be correlated to the increased capacity to generate a higher 
amount of reducing equivalents through the glycolytic activity, which can then 
be utilised for the synthesis of fatty acids stored in lipid droplets.

PMID: 10874983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


602. Anaerobe. 2011 Aug;17(4):166-9. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2011.03.015. Epub 2011 
Apr 14.

Susceptibility of hamsters to infection by historic and epidemic BI Clostridium 
difficile strains during daily administration of three fluoroquinolones.

Phillips ST(1), Nagaro K, Sambol SP, Johnson S, Gerding DN.

Author information:
(1)Loyola University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

BACKGROUND: The recent epidemic of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) has 
been attributed largely to the REA strain group BI (aka NAP1/027). Current 
isolates of the BI group differ from historic non-epidemic BI strains in that 
they have developed resistance to the newer fluoroquinolone (FQ), moxifloxacin. 
The acquisition of moxifloxacin resistance has been associated with the rise in 
frequency of CDI caused by these isolates. In order to explore the effect of FQ 
resistance on CDI we compared colonization and mortality in hamsters challenged 
with a historic (BI1 - susceptible to moxifloxacin) and a recent epidemic (BI17 
- resistant to moxifloxacin) BI strain of CD during continuous administration of 
3 different FQs.
METHODS: Groups of 6 hamsters were treated with a 5 day course of ciprofloxacin, 
levofloxacin, or moxifloxacin given orally once per day. Each hamster was then 
challenged with 1 × 10(4) CFU of either BI1 or BI17 on day 3 or day 5. 
Colonization and time to death were recorded.
RESULTS: Colonization efficiency (CE) following moxifloxacin (92%) was 
significantly greater than following levofloxacin (50%, p < 0.01) or 
ciprofloxacin (42%, p < 0.01) for both strains combined. The CE of BI17 was 
higher than BI1 for ciprofloxacin (67% vs 17%, p = 0.04) and levofloxacin (83% 
vs 17%, p < 0.01), but not moxifloxacin (100% and 83%, p = 0.48) administration. 
BI17 also showed a shorter time from inoculation to death than BI1 following 
moxifloxacin administration (1.8 days vs 3.9 days, p < 0.01). Moxifloxacin 
shortened the time from inoculation to death compared to ciprofloxacin in 
hamsters challenged with BI17 (1.8 days vs 4.0 days, p < 0.01) but not 
levofloxacin (1.8 days vs 2.0 days, p = NS).
CONCLUSIONS: For the epidemic BI17 strain, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin and 
moxifloxacin have similar colonization rates, suggesting that the acquisition of 
high-level FQ resistance increases colonization rates in association with any 
FQ. Historic strain BI1 which does not carry high-level FQ resistance colonized 
efficiently only in the presence of moxifloxacin, possibly explaining lower 
rates of CDI historically prior to the widespread clinical use of moxifloxacin 
(and gatifloxacin). Current high rates and severity of CDI from 2000 to 2010 may 
in part be associated with the acquisition of high-level FQ resistance in BI 
strains and higher patient exposure rates of all FQs, especially moxifloxacin.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2011.03.015
PMID: 21511046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


603. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2019 Jun 24;63(7):e00111-19. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00111-19. Print 2019 Jul.

Modified Mouse Model of Clostridioides difficile Infection as a Platform for 
Probiotic Efficacy Studies.

De Wolfe TJ(1)(2), Kates AE(2)(3), Barko L(2), Darien BJ(4), Safdar N(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania, USA tjdewolfe@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(3)William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison School of 
Veterinary Medicine, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Probiotics may represent a promising approach for reducing Clostridioides 
(Clostridium) difficile infections (CDIs). A clinical trial conducted by our 
group demonstrated that CDI patients undergoing adjunctive treatment with 
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium probiotics had a reduction in diarrheal 
duration and compositional changes in their stool microbiomes. Here, we modified 
a CDI mouse model to represent clinical outcomes observed in patients and 
employed this model to identify evidence for the prevention of primary CDI and 
relapse with the same probiotic. Mice (n = 80) were administered 0.25 mg/ml 
cefoperazone over 5 days and subsequently challenged with 102 C. difficile VPI 
10463 spores. A subset of mice (n = 40) were administered 108 CFU of probiotics 
daily alongside cefoperazone pretreatment and until experimental endpoints were 
reached. Clinical scoring was performed daily on mice and used to evaluate CDI 
onset and severity. Moderate CDI in mice was defined by survival beyond day 3 
postinfection, while mice with severe CDI were those who succumbed to infection 
prior to day 3 postinfection. Sequencing and analysis of 16S rRNA from stool 
content were performed to determine compositional alterations to the microbiota. 
Using total clinical scores, we identified an association between probiotic 
treatment and delayed onset of primary CDI and relapse by approximately 12 to 
24 h (P < 0.001). The stool microbiome of mice with moderate CDI receiving 
probiotic treatment was significantly enriched with Lachnospiraceae during 
primary CDI (P < 0.05). The outcomes observed present an opportunity to use this 
modified CDI mouse model to examine the efficacy of nonantibiotic options for 
CDI management.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00111-19
PMCID: PMC6591643
PMID: 30988143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


604. J Comp Neurol. 2006 Feb 20;494(6):976-85. doi: 10.1002/cne.20861.

Small GTP-binding protein RhoB is expressed in glial Müller cells in the 
vertebrate retina.

Santos-Bredariol AS(1), Belmonte MA, Kihara AH, Santos MF, Hamassaki DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP 05508-900, Brazil.

Among several small Rho GTPases observed in the chick retina, RhoB was 
transiently expressed during development and mainly present in glial Müller 
cells in the adult. The aim of this study was to compare the distribution of 
RhoB in the chick and mouse adult retinas and to study its potential role in the 
maintenance of cell morphology. The distribution of RhoB was studied in situ and 
pure Müller cell cultures were submitted to Clostridium difficile toxin A and 
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) treatment in order to inactivate and activate Rho 
proteins, respectively. Cell morphology, F-actin arrangement, RhoB, and vimentin 
distribution were studied by immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy. The 
results showed that, in both species, all vimentin-containing cells also 
expressed RhoB in situ and in vitro. Toxin A promoted cell rounding and 
detachment due to actin depolymerization, changing the distribution of RhoB only 
in chick cells. In serum-starved cells LPA stimulated actin polymerization and 
cell spreading, but only in chick cells was RhoB distribution recruited to 
expanding cellular processes and newly formed focal adhesions. These data 
suggest that, although RhoB is expressed by Müller cells in chick and mouse, its 
role in the maintenance of cellular morphology and regulation may be different. 
In addition, we show that RhoB may be an interesting Müller cell marker in the 
adult retina.

J. Comp. Neurol. 494:976-985, 2006. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.20861
PMID: 16385489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


605. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 1989 Jun;33(6):906-14. doi: 10.1128/aac.33.6.906.

In vitro and in vivo antibacterial activities of BMY 40062, a new 
fluoronaphthyridone.

Fung-Tomc J(1), Desiderio JV, Tsai YH, Warr G, Kessler RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Bristol-Meyers Company, Wallingford, Connecticut 
06492.

The in vitro and in vivo activities of a new naphthyridone, BMY 40062, were 
compared with those of ciprofloxacin and ofloxacin. BMY 40062 showed about 
threefold more activity than ciprofloxacin showed and four- to eightfold more 
activity than ofloxacin showed against staphylococci, streptococci, and 
enterococci. BMY 40062 showed generally twofold less activity than ciprofloxacin 
showed against most species of the family Enterobacteriaceae, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, and Acinetobacter spp. but twofold more activity than ofloxacin 
showed against these organisms. BMY 40062 and ofloxacin were more active than 
ciprofloxacin against Bacteroides fragilis and Clostridium difficile. The 
antiureaplasmal and antichlamydial activities of BMY 40062 were similar to those 
of the tetracyclines and were 4- and 16-fold, respectively, higher than those of 
ciprofloxacin. The in vitro activities of BMY 40062 were influenced by pH and 
magnesium, although these factors appeared to affect the activity of BMY 40062 
against P. aeruginosa to a lesser extent than those of ciprofloxacin and 
ofloxacin. BMY 40062 was found to be bactericidal, and cross-resistance with 
other fluoroquinolones was observed. In mouse protection tests, the efficacy of 
BMY 40062 reflected its in vitro potency. BMY 40062 exhibited longer half-life, 
higher maximum concentration in serum, greater area under the curve, and better 
bioavailability in mice after oral dosing than ciprofloxacin. Compared with 
ofloxacin, BMY 40062 had a lower maximum concentration in serum but a much 
longer half-life in mice. BMY 40062 was more effective than ciprofloxacin and 
ofloxacin in penetrating mouse macrophages and killing macrophage-associated 
Staphylococcus aureus.

DOI: 10.1128/aac.33.6.906
PMCID: PMC284253
PMID: 2764541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


606. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 29;94(9):4788-93. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.94.9.4788.

Increased substance P responses in dorsal root ganglia and intestinal 
macrophages during Clostridium difficile toxin A enteritis in rats.

Castagliuolo I(1), Keates AC, Qiu B, Kelly CP, Nikulasson S, Leeman SE, 
Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Previously we reported that pretreatment of rats with the substance P (SP) 
antagonist CP-96,345 inhibits the enterotoxic responses following administration 
of toxin A from Clostridium difficile into ileal loops, indicating that SP 
participates in the intestinal responses to this toxin. We now report that 
injection of toxin A into rat ileum causes a rapid increase in SP content in 
lumbar dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and mucosal scrapings 30-60 min after toxin A 
administration. Toxin A-mediated fluid secretion, mannitol permeability, and 
ileal histologic damage is significantly increased only after 2 hr. Toxin A also 
causes an increase in the abundance of SP mRNA in lumbar DRG and ileal mucosa as 
measured by reverse transcription-PCR. Lamina propria macrophages (LPMs) 
obtained from toxin A-injected loops release greater amounts of tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNFalpha) and SP as compared with LPMs isolated from 
buffer-injected loops (P < 0.01). Pretreatment of rats with the SP antagonist 
CP-96,345 inhibits toxin A-mediated TNFalpha release from isolated LPMs, whereas 
an inactive enantiomer (CP-96,344) of the SP antagonist has no effect. LPMs 
obtained from toxin A-injected ileal loops incubated in vitro with SP (10(-8) to 
10(-9) M) show enhanced TNFalpha secretion, whereas LPMs isolated from 
buffer-injected loops do not respond to SP. In addition, LPMs obtained from 
toxin A-injected ileal loops incubated in vitro with CP-96,345 showed a 
diminished TNFalpha release. Our results indicate that activated LPMs secrete SP 
during toxin A enteritis that can lead to secretion of cytokines, suggesting an 
autocrine/paracrine regulation of cytokine secretion by SP from LPMs during 
intestinal inflammation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.94.9.4788
PMCID: PMC20803
PMID: 9114070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


607. Hear Res. 2002 Oct;172(1-2):81-6. doi: 10.1016/s0378-5955(02)00514-2.

Rescue of auditory hair cells from aminoglycoside toxicity by Clostridium 
difficile toxin B, an inhibitor of the small GTPases Rho/Rac/Cdc42.

Bodmer D(1), Brors D, Pak K, Gloddek B, Ryan A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Otolaryngology, UCSD School of Medicine 
and VA Medical Center, 9500 Gilman Drive #0666, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

The hair cells (HCs) are the most vulnerable elements in the cochlea and damage 
to them is the most common cause of sensorineural hearing loss. Understanding 
the intracellular events that lead to the death of HCs is a key to developing 
protective strategies. Recently, it has been shown that the c-Jun-N-terminal 
kinase (JNK) pathway is activated in HCs in response to aminoglycosides (J. 
Neurosci. 20 (2000) 43). We have studied the upstream events leading to JNK 
activation in aminoglycoside toxicity in vitro. The small GTPases Rac and Cdc42 
are well known upstream activators of JNK in other cell types. Clostridium 
difficile toxin B monoglucosylates all members of the Rho GTPase subfamily (Rho, 
Rac and Cdc42 isoforms) and inhibits GTP binding by steric interference (Nature 
341 (1989) 209). Organ of Corti explants from p5 rat basal turns were maintained 
in tissue culture and treated with C. difficile toxin B for 12 h. They were then 
treated with toxin B plus gentamicin for 72 h. Significantly less HC death was 
observed compared to with gentamicin alone. Toxin B alone had no effect on HCs 
at the highest concentration used. Using antibodies against phospho-c-Jun, we 
observed background immunoreactivity in control explants, strong staining of 
outer hair cell nuclei in gentamicin treated explants, and weaker immunostaining 
in explants treated with gentamicin and C. difficile toxin B. We conclude that 
Rho family small GTPases play a role in aminoglycoside toxicity signaling as 
upstream activators of the JNK signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-5955(02)00514-2
PMID: 12361869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


608. J Clin Invest. 1991 Jul;88(1):119-25. doi: 10.1172/JCI115267.

Characterization of rabbit ileal receptors for Clostridium difficile toxin A. 
Evidence for a receptor-coupled G protein.

Pothoulakis C(1), LaMont JT, Eglow R, Gao N, Rubins JB, Theoharides TC, Dickey 
BF.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gastroenterology, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Massachusetts.

The purpose of this study was to characterize the surface receptor for toxin A, 
the enterotoxin from Clostridium difficile, on rabbit intestinal brush borders 
(BB) and on rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) cells. Purified toxin A was 
radiolabeled using a modified Bolton-Hunter method to sp act 2 
microCi/micrograms, with retention of full biologic activity. 3H-Toxin A bound 
specifically to a single class of receptors on rabbit BB and on RBL cells with 
dissociation constants of 5.4 x 10(-8) and 3.5 x 10(-8) M, respectively. RBL 
cells were highly sensitive to toxin A (cell rounding) and had 180,000 specific 
binding sites per cell, whereas IMR-90 fibroblasts were far less sensitive to 
toxin A and lacked detectable specific binding sites. Exposure of BB to trypsin 
or chymotrypsin significantly reduced 3H-toxin A specific binding. Preincubation 
of BB with Bandeirea simplicifolia (BS-1) lectin also reduced specific binding, 
and CHAPS-solubilized receptors could be immobilized with WGA-agarose. The 
addition of 100 nM toxin A accelerated the association of 35S-GTP gamma S with 
rabbit ileal BB, and preincubation of BB with the GTP analogues GTP gamma S or 
Gpp(NH)p, significantly reduced 3H-toxin A specific binding. Our data indicate 
that the membrane receptor for toxin A is a galactose and 
N-acetyl-glucosamine-containing glycoprotein which appears to be coupled to a G 
protein.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI115267
PMCID: PMC296011
PMID: 1905325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


609. Shock. 2018 Jul;50(1):119-125. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000990.

The Effect of Lactoferrin and Pepsin-Treated Lactoferrin on IEC-6 Cell Damage 
Induced by Clostridium Difficile Toxin B.

Otake K(1)(2), Sato N(2)(3), Kitaguchi A(2), Irahara T(1)(2), Murata S(2), 
Shiraga K(4), Ogawa Y(4), Fujiwara TK(5), Koike K(2), Yokota H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Primary Care and Emergency Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Aeromedical Services for Emergency and Trauma Care, Ehime 
University, Ehime, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Center for Meso-Bio Single-Molecule Imaging, Institute for Integrated 
Cell-Material Sciences (WPI-iCeMS), Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) have recently increased worldwide. Some 
CDI progress to fulminant and recurrent CDI and are associated with high 
mortality and morbidity. CD produces toxins A and B, which cause intestinal 
mucosal damage, although toxin B exhibits greater cytotoxicity. Pepsin-treated 
lactoferrin (PLF) is the decomposed product of lactoferrin (LF), a 
multifunctional glycoprotein with anti-inflammatory properties. Here, we 
investigate the effects of LF and PLF in toxin B-stimulated rat intestinal 
epithelial (IEC-6) cells. Different toxin B concentrations were added to IEC-6 
cells with or without LF or PLF. Mitochondrial function and cell cytotoxicity 
were assessed by measuring WST-1 and LDH levels, respectively. WST-1 levels were 
higher in IEC-6 cells treated with toxin B and LF or PLF than in the toxin 
B-only control (P < 0.05). Compared with the toxin B-only control, LDH levels 
significantly decreased after toxin B and LF or PLF addition (P < 0.05). Wound 
restitution measurement using microscopy demonstrated significantly greater 
levels of wound restitution in cells treated with toxin B and LF or PLF than in 
those treated with toxin B alone after 12 h (P < 0.001). Furthermore, changes in 
IEC-6 cell tight junctions (TJs) were evaluated by immunofluorescence microscopy 
and zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1) protein expression. When LF or PLF were added to 
IEC-6 cells, TJ structures were maintained, and ZO-1 and occludin expression was 
upregulated. Taken together, these results demonstrate that LF and PLF prevent 
the cytotoxicity of toxin B and might have the potential to control CDI.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000990
PMID: 28930913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


610. J Clin Invest. 1994 Nov;94(5):1919-26. doi: 10.1172/JCI117542.

Clostridium difficile toxin A-induced microvascular dysfunction. Role of 
histamine.

Kurose I(1), Pothoulakis C, LaMont JT, Anderson DC, Paulson JC, Miyasaka M, Wolf 
R, Granger DN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Shreveport 71130.

Clostridium difficile toxin A (Tx-A) mediates secretion and inflammation in 
experimental enterocolitis. Intravital video microscopy was used to define the 
mechanisms that underlie the inflammatory reactions elicited by direct exposure 
of the microvasculature to Tx-A. Leukocyte adherence and emigration, 
leukocyte-platelet aggregation, and extravasation of FITC-albumin were monitored 
in rat mesenteric venules exposed to Tx-A. Significant increases in leukocyte 
adherence and emigration (LAE) and albumin leakage were noted within 15-30 min 
of Tx-A exposure. These responses were accompanied by mast cell degranulation 
and the formation of platelet-leukocyte aggregates. The Tx-A-induced increases 
in LAE and albumin leakage were significantly attenuated by pretreatment with 
either monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) directed against the leukocyte adhesion 
glycoproteins, CD11/CD18, intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and P-selectin (but 
not E-selectin) or with sialyl Lewis x, a counter-receptor for P-selectin. The 
mast cell stabilizer, lodoxamide, an H1- (but not an H2-) receptor antagonist, 
and diamine oxidase (histaminase) were also effective in reducing the LAE and 
albumin leakage elicited by Tx-A. The platelet-leukocyte aggregation response 
was blunted by an mAb against P-selectin, sialyl Lewis x, and the H1-receptor 
antagonist. These observations indicate that Tx-A induces a leukocyte-dependent 
leakage of albumin from postcapillary venules. Mast cell-derived histamine 
appears to mediate at least part of the leukocyte-endothelial cell adhesion and 
platelet-leukocyte aggregation by engaging H1-receptors on endothelial cells and 
platelets to increase the expression of P-selectin. The adhesion glycoproteins 
CD11/CD18 and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 also contribute to the 
inflammatory responses elicited by toxin A.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI117542
PMCID: PMC294602
PMID: 7962537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


611. J Clin Microbiol. 1998 Jun;36(6):1729-32. doi: 10.1128/JCM.36.6.1729-1732.1998.

Detection of Bacteroides fragilis enterotoxin gene by PCR.

Shetab R(1), Cohen SH, Prindiville T, Tang YJ, Cantrell M, Rahmani D, Silva J 
Jr.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious and Immunologic Diseases, University of California, 
Davis Medical Center, Sacramento 95817, USA.

Bacteroides fragilis constitutes about 1% of the bacterial flora in intestines 
of normal humans. Enterotoxigenic strains of B. fragilis have been associated 
with diarrheal diseases in humans and animals. The enterotoxin produced by these 
isolates induces fluid changes in ligated intestinal loops and an in vitro 
cytotoxic response in HT-29 cells. We developed a nested PCR to detect the 
enterotoxin gene of B. fragilis in stool specimens. After DNA extraction, a 
367-bp fragment was amplified with two outer primers. The amplicon from this 
reaction was subjected to a second round of amplification with a set of internal 
primers. With these inner primers, a 290-bp DNA fragment was obtained which was 
confirmed as part of the B. fragilis enterotoxin gene by Southern blotting with 
a nonradioactive internal probe and a chemiluminescence system. By this 
approach, B. fragilis enterotoxin gene sequences were detected in eight known 
enterotoxigenic human isolates and nine enterotoxigenic horse isolates. No 
amplification products were obtained from DNA extracted from 28 
nonenterotoxigenic B. fragilis isolates or B. distasonis, B. thetaiotaomicron, 
B. uniformis, B. ovatus, Escherichia coli, or Clostridium difficile. The 
sensitivity of this assay allowed us to detect as little as 1 pg of enterotoxin 
DNA sequences or 100 to 1,000 cells of enterotoxigenic B. fragilis/g of stool. 
Enterotoxin production of all isolates was confirmed in vitro in HT-29 cells. A 
100% correlation was obtained between enterotoxin detection by cytotoxin assay 
and the nested PCR assay. This rapid and sensitive assay can be used to identify 
enterotoxigenic B. fragilis and may be used clinically to determine the role of 
B. fragilis in diarrheal diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.36.6.1729-1732.1998
PMCID: PMC104908
PMID: 9620408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


612. J Exp Med. 2018 Jun 4;215(6):1519-1529. doi: 10.1084/jem.20172060. Epub 2018 May 
23.

GSDMD is critical for autoinflammatory pathology in a mouse model of Familial 
Mediterranean Fever.

Kanneganti A(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Malireddi RKS(6), Saavedra PHV(1)(2), Vande Walle 
L(1)(2), Van Gorp H(1)(2), Kambara H(4)(5), Tillman H(7), Vogel P(7), Luo 
HR(4)(5), Xavier RJ(3)(8), Chi H(6), Lamkanfi M(9)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Inflammation Research, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie, 
Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Gastrointestinal Unit, Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(4)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA.
(5)Department of Lab Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Dana-Farber/Harvard 
Cancer Center, Boston, MA.
(6)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(7)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN.
(8)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA.
(9)Center for Inflammation Research, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie, 
Ghent, Belgium mlamkanf@its.jnj.com.

Pyroptosis is an inflammasome-induced lytic cell death mode, the physiological 
role of which in chronic inflammatory diseases is unknown. Familial 
Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is the most common monogenic autoinflammatory disease 
worldwide, affecting an estimated 150,000 patients. The disease is caused by 
missense mutations in Mefv that activate the Pyrin inflammasome, but the 
pathophysiologic mechanisms driving autoinflammation in FMF are incompletely 
understood. Here, we show that Clostridium difficile infection of FMF knock-in 
macrophages that express a chimeric FMF-associated MefvV726A Pyrin elicited 
pyroptosis and gasdermin D (GSDMD)-mediated interleukin (IL)-1β secretion. 
Importantly, in vivo GSDMD deletion abolished spontaneous autoinflammatory 
disease. GSDMD-deficient FMF knock-in mice were fully protected from the runted 
growth, anemia, systemic inflammatory cytokine production, neutrophilia, and 
tissue damage that characterize this autoinflammatory disease model. Overall, 
this work identifies pyroptosis as a critical mechanism of IL-1β-dependent 
autoinflammation in FMF and highlights GSDMD inhibition as a potential 
antiinflammatory strategy in inflammasome-driven diseases.

© 2018 Kanneganti et al.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20172060
PMCID: PMC5987922
PMID: 29793924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


613. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2015 Mar;59(3):1596-604. doi: 10.1128/AAC.04296-14. 
Epub 2014 Dec 29.

Effects of tigecycline and vancomycin administration on established Clostridium 
difficile infection.

Theriot CM(1), Schumacher CA(2), Bassis CM(3), Seekatz AM(3), Young VB(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Division of Infectious Diseases, The 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA caseythe@med.umich.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine/Division of Infectious Diseases, The 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine/Division of Infectious Diseases, The 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.

The glycylcycline antibiotic tigecycline was approved in 2005 for the treatment 
of complicated skin and soft tissue infections and complicated intra-abdominal 
infections. Tigecycline is broadly active against both Gram-negative and 
Gram-positive microorganisms, including Clostridium difficile. Tigecycline has a 
low MIC against C. difficile in vitro and thus may represent an alternate 
treatment for C. difficile infection (CDI). To assess the use of tigecycline for 
treatment of established CDI, 5- to 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice were colonized with 
C. difficile strain 630. After C. difficile colonization was established, mice 
(n = 10 per group) were treated with either a 5-day course of tigecycline (6.25 
mg/kg every 12 h subcutaneously) or a 5-day course of vancomycin (0.4 mg/ml in 
drinking water) and compared to infected, untreated control mice. Mice were 
evaluated for clinical signs of CDI throughout treatment and at 1 week 
posttreatment to assess potential for disease development. Immediately following 
a treatment course, C. difficile was not detectable in the feces of 
vancomycin-treated mice but remained detectable in feces from 
tigecycline-treated and untreated control mice. Toxin activity and 
histopathological inflammation and edema were observed in the ceca and colons of 
untreated mice; tigecycline- and vancomycin-treated mice did not show such 
changes directly after treatment. One week after the conclusion of either 
antibiotic treatment, C. difficile load, toxin activity, and histopathology 
scores increased in the cecum and colon, indicating that C. difficile-associated 
disease occurred. In vitro growth studies confirmed that subinhibitory 
concentrations of tigecycline were able to suppress toxin activity and spore 
formation of C. difficile, whereas vancomycin did not. Taken together, these 
data show how tigecycline is able to alter C. difficile pathogenesis in a mouse 
model of CDI.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04296-14
PMCID: PMC4325817
PMID: 25547352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


614. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2014 Aug;58(8):4642-50. doi: 10.1128/AAC.02783-14. 
Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Fidaxomicin inhibits Clostridium difficile toxin A-mediated enteritis in the 
mouse ileum.

Koon HW(1), Ho S(1), Hing TC(1), Cheng M(1), Chen X(2), Ichikawa Y(3), Kelly 
CP(2), Pothoulakis C(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Division of Digestive Diseases, David 
Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Cubist Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Lexington, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Center for Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Division of Digestive Diseases, David 
Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California, USA cpothoulakis@mednet.ucla.edu.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a common, debilitating infection with 
high morbidity and mortality. C. difficile causes diarrhea and intestinal 
inflammation by releasing two toxins, toxin A and toxin B. The macrolide 
antibiotic fidaxomicin was recently shown to be effective in treating CDI, and 
its beneficial effect was associated with fewer recurrent infections in CDI 
patients. Since other macrolides possess anti-inflammatory properties, we 
examined the possibility that fidaxomicin alters C. difficile toxin A-induced 
ileal inflammation in mice. The ileal loops of anesthetized mice were injected 
with fidaxomicin (5, 10, or 20 μM), and after 30 min, the loops were injected 
with purified C. difficile toxin A or phosphate-buffered saline alone. Four 
hours after toxin A administration, ileal tissues were processed for 
histological evaluation (epithelial cell damage, neutrophil infiltration, 
congestion, and edema) and cytokine measurements. C. difficile toxin A caused 
histologic damage, evidenced by increased mean histologic score and ileal 
interleukin-1β (IL-1β) protein and mRNA expression. Treatment with fidaxomicin 
(20 μM) or its primary metabolite, OP-1118 (120 μM), significantly inhibited 
toxin A-mediated histologic damage and reduced the mean histology score and 
ileal IL-1β protein and mRNA expression. Both fidaxomicin and OP-1118 reduced 
toxin A-induced cell rounding in human colonic CCD-18Co fibroblasts. Treatment 
of ileal loops with vancomycin (20 μM) and metronidazole (20 μM) did not alter 
toxin A-induced histologic damage and IL-1β protein expression. In addition to 
its well known antibacterial effects against C. difficile, fidaxomicin may 
possess anti-inflammatory activity directed against the intestinal effects of C. 
difficile toxins.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02783-14
PMCID: PMC4135997
PMID: 24890583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


615. J Mol Med (Berl). 2007 Dec;85(12):1393-404. doi: 10.1007/s00109-007-0237-7. Epub 
2007 Jul 18.

Effects of transcription factor activator protein-1 on interleukin-8 expression 
and enteritis in response to Clostridium difficile toxin A.

Lee JY(1), Park HR, Oh YK, Kim YJ, Youn J, Han JS, Kim JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute of Biomedical Science, Hanyang 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, 133-791, South Korea.

Clostridium difficile toxin A causes acute colitis associated with intense 
infiltration of neutrophils. Although C. difficile toxin A is known to induce 
nuclear factor-kappaB-mediated chemokine expression in intestinal epithelial 
cells, little is known about its effect on the regulation of activator protein-1 
(AP-1) by mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK). In the present study, we 
investigated whether the MAPK and AP-1 signaling pathway is involved in 
interleukin (IL)-8 expression and enteric inflammation in response to 
stimulation with toxin A. Toxin A activated MAPK and AP-1 composed of 
c-Jun/c-Fos heterodimers in primary intestinal epithelial cells and HT-29 cell 
lines. Transfection with mutant genes for Ras, c-Jun, p38, or c-Jun N-terminal 
kinase (JNK) significantly inhibited C. difficile toxin A-induced activation of 
AP-1 and expression of IL-8 in HT-29 cell lines. Furthermore, the p38 inhibitor 
SB203580 attenuated toxin A-induced inflammation in vivo in the mouse ileum, 
evidenced by a significant decrease in neutrophil infiltration, villous 
destruction, and mucosal congestion. Our results suggest that the Ras/MAPK 
cascade acts as the upstream signaling for AP-1 activation and IL-8 expression 
in toxin A-stimulated intestinal epithelial cells and may be involved in the 
development of enteritis after infection with toxin A-producing C. difficile.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-007-0237-7
PMID: 17639289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


616. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2003 Jul;10(4):587-95. doi: 
10.1128/cdli.10.4.587-595.2003.

Recombinant single-chain variable fragment antibodies directed against 
Clostridium difficile toxin B produced by use of an optimized phage display 
system.

Deng XK(1), Nesbit LA, Morrow KJ Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biochemistry, Texas Tech University Health 
Sciences Center, Lubbock, Texas 79430, USA.

Recombinant antibody cloning and phage display technologies were used to produce 
single-chain antibodies (scFv) against Clostridium difficile toxin B. The 
starting material was the mouse B cell hybridoma line 5A8, which generates a 
monoclonal antibody against the toxin. The integrated cloning, screening, and 
phage display system of Krebber et al. (J. Immunol. Methods 201:35-55, 1997) 
allowed us to rapidly obtain toxin B-binding scFv sequences derived from the 
hybridoma cell line. The best candidate scFv sequences, based on preliminary 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) screening data were then subcloned 
into the compatible expression vector. Recombinant single-chain antibodies were 
expressed in Escherichia coli. A 29-kDa band was observed on polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis as predicted. The expressed product was characterized by 
immunoblotting and detection with an anti-FLAG antibody. The toxin B-binding 
function of the single-chain antibody was shown by a sandwich ELISA. The 
antibody was highly specific for toxin B and did not cross-react with material 
isolated from a toxin B-negative C. difficile strain. The sensitivity of the 
soluble single-chain antibody is significantly higher than the original 
monoclonal antibody based on ELISA data and could detect a minimum of 10 ng of 
toxin B/well. Competitive ELISAs established that the affinity of the 5A8 parent 
antibody and the best representative (clone 10) of the single-chain antibodies 
were similar and in the range of 10(-8) M. We propose that recombinant antibody 
technology is a rapid and effective approach to the development of the next 
generation of immunodiagnostic reagents.

DOI: 10.1128/cdli.10.4.587-595.2003
PMCID: PMC164272
PMID: 12853390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


617. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Dec 7;20(45):17084-91. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v20.i45.17084.

Clostridium difficile infection aggravates colitis in interleukin 10-deficient 
mice.

Kim MN(1), Koh SJ(1), Kim JM(1), Im JP(1), Jung HC(1), Kim JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Mi Na Kim, Seoul National University Healthcare System Gangnam Center, Seoul 
National University Hospital, Seoul 135-984, South Korea.

AIM: To investigate the effect of Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) infection 
in an interleukin 10-deficient (IL-10(-/-)) mouse model of inflammatory bowel 
disease.
METHODS: Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells isolated from wild type (WT) and 
IL-10(-/-)mice were stimulated for 4 h with C. difficile toxin A (200 μg/mL), 
and gene expression of interferon (IFN)-γ, IL-12 and IL-23 was determined by 
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. WT and IL-10(-/-) 
mice (n = 20 each) were exposed to an antibiotic cocktail for three days and 
then were injected with clindamycin (i.p.). Mice (n = 10 WT, 10 IL-10(-/-)) were 
then challenged with oral administration of C. difficile (1 × 10(5) colony 
forming units of strain VPI 10463). Animals were monitored daily for 7 d for 
signs of colitis. Colonic tissue samples were evaluated for cytokine gene 
expression and histopathologic analysis.
RESULTS: C. difficile toxin A treatment induced IFN-γ gene expression to a level 
that was significantly higher in BDMCs from IL-10(-/-) compared to those from WT 
mice (P < 0.05). However, expression of IL-12 and IL-23 was not different among 
the groups. Following C. difficile administration, mice developed diarrhea and 
lost weight within 2-3 d. Weight loss was significantly greater in IL-10(-/-) 
compared to WT mice (P < 0.05). C. difficile infection induced histopathologic 
features typical of colitis in both IL-10(-/-) and WT mice. The histopathologic 
severity score was significantly higher in the IL-10(-/-) than in WT mice (mean 
± standard error; 5.50 ± 0.53 vs 2.44 ± 0.46; P < 0.05). This was accompanied by 
a significantly greater increase in IFN-γ gene expression in colonic tissues 
from IL-10(-/-) than from WT mice challenged with C. difficile (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that colitis is more severe after C. 
difficile infection in IL-10(-/-)mice, and that IFN-γ expression is involved in 
this process.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i45.17084
PMCID: PMC4258576
PMID: 25493020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


618. mSystems. 2020 Feb 11;5(1):e00765-19. doi: 10.1128/mSystems.00765-19.

A High-Fat/High-Protein, Atkins-Type Diet Exacerbates Clostridioides 
(Clostridium) difficile Infection in Mice, whereas a High-Carbohydrate Diet 
Protects.

Mefferd CC(#)(1), Bhute SS(#)(1), Phan JR(2), Villarama JV(1), Do DM(2), Alarcia 
S(1), Abel-Santos E(3)(4), Hedlund BP(5)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada, 
USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA Ernesto.abelsantos@unlv.edu brian.hedlund@unlv.edu.
(4)Nevada Institute of Personalized Medicine, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA.
(5)School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada, 
USA Ernesto.abelsantos@unlv.edu brian.hedlund@unlv.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Clostridioides difficile (formerly Clostridium difficile) infection (CDI) can 
result from the disruption of the resident gut microbiota. Western diets and 
popular weight-loss diets drive large changes in the gut microbiome; however, 
the literature is conflicted with regard to the effect of diet on CDI. Using the 
hypervirulent strain C. difficile R20291 (RT027) in a mouse model of 
antibiotic-induced CDI, we assessed disease outcome and microbial community 
dynamics in mice fed two high-fat diets in comparison with a high-carbohydrate 
diet and a standard rodent diet. The two high-fat diets exacerbated CDI, with a 
high-fat/high-protein, Atkins-like diet leading to severe CDI and 100% mortality 
and a high-fat/low-protein, medium-chain-triglyceride (MCT)-like diet inducing 
highly variable CDI outcomes. In contrast, mice fed a high-carbohydrate diet 
were protected from CDI, despite the high levels of refined carbohydrate and low 
levels of fiber in the diet. A total of 28 members of the Lachnospiraceae and 
Ruminococcaceae decreased in abundance due to diet and/or antibiotic treatment; 
these organisms may compete with C. difficile for amino acids and protect 
healthy animals from CDI in the absence of antibiotics. Together, these data 
suggest that antibiotic treatment might lead to loss of C. difficile competitors 
and create a favorable environment for C. difficile proliferation and virulence 
with effects that are intensified by high-fat/high-protein diets; in contrast, 
high-carbohydrate diets might be protective regardless of the source of 
carbohydrate or of antibiotic-driven loss of C. difficile competitors.IMPORTANCE 
The role of Western and weight-loss diets with extreme macronutrient composition 
in the risk and progression of CDI is poorly understood. In a longitudinal 
study, we showed that a high-fat/high-protein, Atkins-type diet greatly 
exacerbated antibiotic-induced CDI, whereas a high-carbohydrate diet protected, 
despite the high monosaccharide and starch content. Our study results, 
therefore, suggest that popular high-fat/high-protein weight-loss diets may 
enhance CDI risk during antibiotic treatment, possibly due to the synergistic 
effects of a loss of the microorganisms that normally inhibit C. difficile 
overgrowth and an abundance of amino acids that promote C. difficile overgrowth. 
In contrast, a high-carbohydrate diet might be protective, despite reports on 
the recent evolution of enhanced carbohydrate metabolism in C. difficile.

Copyright © 2020 Mefferd et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSystems.00765-19
PMCID: PMC7018531
PMID: 32047064


619. Pol J Microbiol. 2005;54(4):301-4.

Co-infection of hamsters with toxin A or toxin B-deficient Clostridium difficile 
strains.

Szczesny A(1), Martirosian G, Cohen S, Silva J Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, 
Poland.

Male Syrian hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) were used to study interactions 
between different toxin deficient strains of C. difficile. After sensitization 
with clindamycin, hamsters were intragastrically co-infected with the 
appropriate dilutions corresponding to 100, 1000 and 10,000 cells of four (toxin 
A or B-deficient) C. difficile strains (8864, P-829, W-38 and W-74). In 
addition, a group of hamsters was infected with C. difficile VPI 10463, a 
reference toxigenic strain. Colonization and mortality was observed within 48 
hours in the group of hamsters infected with the reference toxigenic strain. No 
clinical disease was observed in the groups of hamsters co-infected with the 
toxin A or B-deficient strains. Re-infection of these hamsters (co-infected with 
toxin deficient isolates) with C. difficile VPI 10463 resulted in clinical 
disease and death suggesting that these strains do not confer protection against 
infection with a toxigenic strain. Macroscopic and microscopic observations of 
the cecum of re-infected hamsters demonstrated uniformly multiple large 
hemorrhagic areas without pseudomembranes. Hamsters infected with as few as 
100-500 cells of the toxigenic strain--VPI 10463 alone demonstrated 
pseudomembranes and multiple hemorrhages. These results suggest that even though 
the toxin deficient strains did not prevent re-infection with a toxigenic strain 
of C. difficile, they may play a role in the histopathologic changes after 
re-infections in the hamster model. Further studies with a larger number of 
hamsters and C. difficile strains of various molecular profiles are required to 
better understand the interaction between these strains.

PMID: 16599301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


620. J Infect. 2018 Nov;77(5):417-426. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2018.06.006. Epub 2018 Jun 
30.

Diverse bacterial species contribute to antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and 
gastrointestinal damage.

Larcombe S(1), Hutton ML(1), Riley TV(2), Abud HE(3), Lyras D(4).

Author information:
(1)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and 
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, PathWest Laboratory Medicine; School of Medical 
and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University; School of Veterinary and Life 
Sciences, Murdoch University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(3)Cancer Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of 
Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 
Australia.
(4)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and 
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. 
Electronic address: Dena.Lyras@monash.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea (AAD) caused by C. difficile is one 
of the most common nosocomial infections, however, little is known about 
infections related to antimicrobial use for pathogens other than C. difficile. 
We therefore aimed to provide insight into other bacterial causes of AAD, and 
how infection with these pathogens causes damage in the dysbiotic gut.
METHODS: Clinical isolates from C. difficile-negative AAD patients were whole 
genome sequenced for in silico analysis of potential virulence factors and 
antimicrobial resistance determinants. A mouse model of infection was developed 
to assess the capacity of these isolates to cause gastrointestinal damage, which 
was analysed by studying specific markers in the gastrointestinal mucosa of 
infected mice.
RESULTS: Several bacterial pathogens were isolated from patients with C. 
difficile-negative AAD. Each isolate showed the potential for virulence based on 
encoded virulence factors, as well as most showing antimicrobial resistance in 
vitro. Isolates of Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Klebsiella 
pneumoniae were tested in the mouse model of infection, inducing damage 
primarily in the small intestine, affecting adherens junction integrity, 
cellular polarity, and cellular proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Several pathogens of clinical importance other than C. difficile 
are able to cause gastrointestinal infection following antimicrobial-mediated 
dysbiosis. The virulence potential and multidrug resistance identified in these 
isolates illuminates the importance of further diagnostic screening in cases of 
C. difficile-negative AAD.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2018.06.006
PMID: 29964142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


621. Nat Microbiol. 2020 Jan;5(1):166-180. doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0613-4. Epub 2019 
Nov 25.

Epigenomic characterization of Clostridioides difficile finds a conserved DNA 
methyltransferase that mediates sporulation and pathogenesis.

Oliveira PH(1), Ribis JW(2), Garrett EM(3), Trzilova D(3), Kim A(1), Sekulovic 
O(2), Mead EA(1), Pak T(1), Zhu S(1), Deikus G(1), Touchon M(4)(5), 
Lewis-Sandari M(1), Beckford C(1), Zeitouni NE(1), Altman DR(1)(6), Webster 
E(1), Oussenko I(1), Bunyavanich S(1), Aggarwal AK(7), Bashir A(1), Patel G(6), 
Wallach F(6), Hamula C(6), Huprikar S(6), Schadt EE(1)(8), Sebra R(1), van Bakel 
H(1), Kasarskis A(1), Tamayo R(3), Shen A(9), Fang G(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Institute for Genomics and 
Multiscale Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)Microbial Evolutionary Genomics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.
(5)CNRS, UMR3525, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Mount Sinai School 
of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Pharmacological Sciences and Department of Oncological 
Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Sema4, Stamford, CT, USA.
(9)Department of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Tufts University School of 
Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. aimee.shen@tufts.edu.
(10)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Institute for Genomics and 
Multiscale Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 
gang.fang@mssm.edu.

Clostridioides (formerly Clostridium) difficile is a leading cause of 
healthcare-associated infections. Although considerable progress has been made 
in the understanding of its genome, the epigenome of C. difficile and its 
functional impact has not been systematically explored. Here, we perform a 
comprehensive DNA methylome analysis of C. difficile using 36 human isolates and 
observe a high level of epigenomic diversity. We discovered an orphan DNA 
methyltransferase with a well-defined specificity, the corresponding gene of 
which is highly conserved across our dataset and in all of the approximately 300 
global C. difficile genomes examined. Inactivation of the methyltransferase gene 
negatively impacts sporulation, a key step in C. difficile disease transmission, 
and these results are consistently supported by multiomics data, genetic 
experiments and a mouse colonization model. Further experimental and 
transcriptomic analyses suggest that epigenetic regulation is associated with 
cell length, biofilm formation and host colonization. These findings provide a 
unique epigenetic dimension to characterize medically relevant biological 
processes in this important pathogen. This study also provides a set of methods 
for comparative epigenomics and integrative analysis, which we expect to be 
broadly applicable to bacterial epigenomic studies.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-019-0613-4
PMCID: PMC6925328
PMID: 31768029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests Statement A.S. has a 
consultant role for BioVector, a diagnostic start-up. We declare that the 
authors have no other competing interests as defined by Nature Publishing Group, 
or other interests that might be perceived to influence the results and/or 
discussion in this article.


622. Nat Med. 2011 Aug 21;17(9):1136-41. doi: 10.1038/nm.2405.

Host S-nitrosylation inhibits clostridial small molecule-activated glucosylating 
toxins.

Savidge TC(1), Urvil P, Oezguen N, Ali K, Choudhury A, Acharya V, Pinchuk I, 
Torres AG, English RD, Wiktorowicz JE, Loeffelholz M, Kumar R, Shi L, Nie W, 
Braun W, Herman B, Hausladen A, Feng H, Stamler JS, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. tcsavidg@utmb.edu

The global prevalence of severe Clostridium difficile infection highlights the 
profound clinical significance of clostridial glucosylating toxins. Virulence is 
dependent on the autoactivation of a toxin cysteine protease, which is promoted 
by the allosteric cofactor inositol hexakisphosphate (InsP(6)). Host mechanisms 
that protect against such exotoxins are poorly understood. It is increasingly 
appreciated that the pleiotropic functions attributed to nitric oxide (NO), 
including host immunity, are in large part mediated by S-nitrosylation of 
proteins. Here we show that C. difficile toxins are S-nitrosylated by the 
infected host and that S-nitrosylation attenuates virulence by inhibiting toxin 
self-cleavage and cell entry. Notably, InsP(6)- and inositol pyrophosphate 
(InsP(7))-induced conformational changes in the toxin enabled host 
S-nitrosothiols to transnitrosylate the toxin catalytic cysteine, which forms 
part of a structurally conserved nitrosylation motif. Moreover, treatment with 
exogenous InsP(6) enhanced the therapeutic actions of oral S-nitrosothiols in 
mouse models of C. difficile infection. Allostery in bacterial proteins has thus 
been successfully exploited in the evolutionary development of 
nitrosothiol-based innate immunity and may provide an avenue to new therapeutic 
approaches.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.2405
PMCID: PMC3277400
PMID: 21857653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


623. J Clin Microbiol. 1986 Aug;24(2):275-81. doi: 10.1128/JCM.24.2.275-281.1986.

Cytotoxic and cytotonic factors produced by Campylobacter jejuni, Campylobacter 
coli, and Campylobacter laridis.

Johnson WM, Lior H.

Complete toxigenicity studies were performed on 341 strains of Campylobacter 
spp., including 23 nonhuman isolates. Toxin profiles based on both cytotonic and 
cytotoxic factors were determined after analyzing responses in Vero, HeLa, CHO 
and Y-1 cells. Suckling mouse assays were consistently negative for all culture 
filtrates tested. Toxin-producing strains were frequently encountered among both 
the human and nonhuman strains of Campylobacter jejuni, C. coli, and C. laridis 
investigated. Strains isolated from outbreaks demonstrated parallels in 
serotype, biotype, and toxigenicity profile, although no clear association could 
be demonstrated. Biphasic culture conditions conducive to the production of both 
toxic factors were delineated for the propagation of test Campylobacter strains. 
Cytotonic effects of Campylobacter culture filtrates were determined in Vero and 
CHO cells, and cyclic AMP accumulation in cells exposed to these culture 
filtrates was compared with that in cells exposed to reference toxigenic strains 
of Vibrio cholerae and Escherichia coli. Partial neutralization of C. jejuni 
enterotoxin was demonstrated by using antitoxins to cholera toxin and E. coli 
heat-labile enterotoxin. No neutralization of C. jejuni cytotoxin could be 
achieved by using antitoxins to either Clostridium difficile cytotoxin or E. 
coli Verotoxin (0157:H7).

DOI: 10.1128/JCM.24.2.275-281.1986
PMCID: PMC268889
PMID: 3018039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


624. ACS Chem Biol. 2020 May 15;15(5):1212-1221. doi: 10.1021/acschembio.9b00906. 
Epub 2020 Jan 14.

Small Molecule Inhibitor Screen Reveals Calcium Channel Signaling as a 
Mechanistic Mediator of Clostridium difficile TcdB-Induced Necrosis.

Farrow MA(1), Chumber NM(1), Bloch SC(1), King M(1), Moton-Melancon K(1), Shupe 
J(1), Washington MK(1), Spiller BW(1)(2), Lacy DB(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, A4116A Medical Center North, 1161 21st Avenue South, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2363, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, United States.
(3)The Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, Tennessee 
37212, United States.

Clostridioides difficile is the leading cause of nosocomial diarrhea in the 
United States. The primary virulence factors are two homologous 
glucosyltransferase toxins, TcdA and TcdB, that inactivate host Rho-family 
GTPases. The glucosyltransferase activity has been linked to a "cytopathic" 
disruption of the actin cytoskeleton and contributes to the disruption of tight 
junctions and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. TcdB is also a 
potent cytotoxin that causes epithelium necrotic damage through an NADPH oxidase 
(NOX)-dependent mechanism. We conducted a small molecule screen to identify 
compounds that confer protection against TcdB-induced necrosis. We identified an 
enrichment of "hit compounds" with a dihydropyridine (DHP) core which led to the 
discovery of a key early stage calcium signal that serves as a mechanistic link 
between TcdB-induced NOX activation and reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
production. Disruption of TcdB-induced calcium signaling (with both DHP and 
non-DHP molecules) is sufficient to ablate ROS production and prevent subsequent 
necrosis in cells and in a mouse model of intoxication.

DOI: 10.1021/acschembio.9b00906
PMCID: PMC7230009
PMID: 31909964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.


625. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018 Feb 16;14(2):e1006001. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006001. 
eCollection 2018 Feb.

In silico analysis of antibiotic-induced Clostridium difficile infection: 
Remediation techniques and biological adaptations.

Jones EW(1), Carlson JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa 
Barbara, California, United States of America.

In this paper we study antibiotic-induced C. difficile infection (CDI), caused 
by the toxin-producing C. difficile (CD), and implement clinically-inspired 
simulated treatments in a computational framework that synthesizes a generalized 
Lotka-Volterra (gLV) model with SIR modeling techniques. The gLV model uses 
parameters derived from an experimental mouse model, in which the mice are 
administered antibiotics and subsequently dosed with CD. We numerically identify 
which of the experimentally measured initial conditions are vulnerable to CD 
colonization, then formalize the notion of CD susceptibility analytically. We 
simulate fecal transplantation, a clinically successful treatment for CDI, and 
discover that both the transplant timing and transplant donor are relevant to 
the the efficacy of the treatment, a result which has clinical implications. We 
incorporate two nongeneric yet dangerous attributes of CD into the gLV model, 
sporulation and antibiotic-resistant mutation, and for each identify relevant 
SIR techniques that describe the desired attribute. Finally, we rely on the 
results of our framework to analyze an experimental study of fecal transplants 
in mice, and are able to explain observed experimental results, validate our 
simulated results, and suggest model-motivated experiments.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006001
PMCID: PMC5833281
PMID: 29451873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


626. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Sep 10;312(15):2954-61. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2006.05.016. 
Epub 2006 Jun 7.

JNK phosphorylation of paxillin, acting through the Rac1 and Cdc42 signaling 
cascade, mediates neurite extension in N1E-115 cells.

Yamauchi J(1), Miyamoto Y, Sanbe A, Tanoue A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Research Institute for Child Health and 
Development, 2-10-1 Oukura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan. jyamauchi@nch.go.jp

Neurons extend neurites from the cell body before formation of the polarized 
processes of an axon and dendrites. Neurite outgrowth involves remodeling of the 
cytoskeletal components, which are initially regulated by small GTPases of the 
Rho family. Here we show that c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), which is controlled 
by Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42, is activated following neurite extension in mouse 
N1E-115 neuroblastoma cells as a model. The extension is inhibited by JNK 
inhibitors (SP600125 and the small JNK-binding peptide) and Clostridium 
difficile Toxin B, the inhibitor for Rho GTPases. Additionally, paxillin, the 
multifunctional focal adhesion protein, is phosphorylated at Ser 178 by 
upregulation of the Rac1/Cdc42/JNK cascade. Conversely, transfection of the 
paxillin construct harboring the Ser 178-to-Ala mutation into cells inhibits 
neurite extension. Taken together, these results suggest the novel role of the 
Rac1/Cdc42/JNK signaling cascade in neurite extension and indicate that the 
downstream target paxillin may be one of the convergent points of various 
signaling pathways underlying neurite extension.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2006.05.016
PMID: 16814769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


627. Front Microbiol. 2018 Jun 6;9:1206. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01206. eCollection 
2018.

A Small Molecule-Screening Pipeline to Evaluate the Therapeutic Potential of 
2-Aminoimidazole Molecules Against Clostridium difficile.

Thanissery R(1), Zeng D(2), Doyle RG(2), Theriot CM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, United States.
(2)Agile Sciences, Inc., Raleigh, NC, United States.

Antibiotics are considered to be the first line of treatment for mild to 
moderately severe Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) in humans. However, 
antibiotics are also risk factors for CDI as they decrease colonization 
resistance against C. difficile by altering the gut microbiota and metabolome. 
Finding compounds that selectively inhibit different stages of the C. difficile 
life cycle, while sparing the indigenous gut microbiota is important for the 
development of alternatives to standard antibiotic treatment. 2-aminoimidazole 
(2-AI) molecules are known to disrupt bacterial protection mechanisms in 
antibiotic resistant bacteria such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter 
baumannii, and Staphylococcus aureus, but are yet to be evaluated against C. 
difficile. A comprehensive small molecule-screening pipeline was developed to 
investigate how novel small molecules affect different stages of the C. 
difficile life cycle (growth, toxin, and sporulation) in vitro, and a library of 
commensal bacteria that are associated with colonization resistance against C. 
difficile. The initial screening tested the efficacy of eleven 2-AI molecules 
(compound 1 through 11) against C. difficile R20291 compared to a vancomycin (2 
μg/ml) control. Molecules were selected for their ability to inhibit C. 
difficile growth, toxin activity, and sporulation. Further testing included 
growth inhibition of other C. difficile strains (CD196, M68, CF5, 630, BI9, 
M120) belonging to distinct PCR ribotypes, and a commensal panel (Bacteroides 
fragilis, B. thetaiotaomicron, C. scindens, C. hylemonae, Lactobacillus 
acidophilus, L. gasseri, Escherichia coli, B. longum subsp. infantis). Three 
molecules compound 1 and 2, and 3 were microbicidal, whereas compounds 4, 7, 9, 
and 11 inhibited toxin activity without affecting the growth of C. difficile 
strains and the commensal microbiota. The antimicrobial and anti-toxin effects 
of 2-AI molecules need to be further characterized for mode of action and 
validated in a mouse model of CDI.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01206
PMCID: PMC5997789
PMID: 29928268


628. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47525. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047525. Epub 2012 Oct 
11.

Modeling the role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ and 
microRNA-146 in mucosal immune responses to Clostridium difficile.

Viladomiu M(1), Hontecillas R, Pedragosa M, Carbo A, Hoops S, Michalak P, 
Michalak K, Guerrant RL, Roche JK, Warren CA, Bassaganya-Riera J.

Author information:
(1)Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine Laboratory, Virginia 
Bioinformatics Institute, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.

Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic bacterium that has re-emerged as a 
facultative pathogen and can cause nosocomial diarrhea, colitis or even death. 
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) γ has been implicated in the 
prevention of inflammation in autoimmune and infectious diseases; however, its 
role in the immunoregulatory mechanisms modulating host responses to C. 
difficile and its toxins remains largely unknown. To characterize the role of 
PPARγ in C. difficile-associated disease (CDAD), immunity and gut pathology, we 
used a mouse model of C. difficile infection in wild-type and T cell-specific 
PPARγ null mice. The loss of PPARγ in T cells increased disease activity and 
colonic inflammatory lesions following C. difficile infection. Colonic 
expression of IL-17 was upregulated and IL-10 downregulated in colons of T 
cell-specific PPARγ null mice. Also, both the loss of PPARγ in T cells and C. 
difficile infection favored Th17 responses in spleen and colonic lamina propria 
of mice with CDAD. MicroRNA (miRNA)-sequencing analysis and RT-PCR validation 
indicated that miR-146b was significantly overexpressed and nuclear receptor 
co-activator 4 (NCOA4) suppressed in colons of C. difficile-infected mice. We 
next developed a computational model that predicts the upregulation of miR-146b, 
downregulation of the PPARγ co-activator NCOA4, and PPARγ, leading to 
upregulation of IL-17. Oral treatment of C. difficile-infected mice with the 
PPARγ agonist pioglitazone ameliorated colitis and suppressed pro-inflammatory 
gene expression. In conclusion, our data indicates that miRNA-146b and PPARγ 
activation may be implicated in the regulation of Th17 responses and colitis in 
C. difficile-infected mice.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047525
PMCID: PMC3469550
PMID: 23071818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


629. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Dec 21;62(1):e01943-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.01943-17. Print 2018 Jan.

Combating Multidrug-Resistant Pathogens with Host-Directed Nonantibiotic 
Therapeutics.

Andersson JA(1), Sha J(2)(3), Kirtley ML(2), Reyes E(2), Fitts EC(2), Dann 
SM(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Chopra AK(6)(2)(3)(7)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Translational Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(3)Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA.
(5)Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, University of Texas 
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(6)Institute for Translational Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA achopra@utmb.edu.
(7)WHO Collaborating Center for Vaccine Development, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.

Earlier, we reported that three Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs, 
trifluoperazine (TFP; an antipsychotic), amoxapine (AXPN; an antidepressant), 
and doxapram (DXP; a breathing stimulant), identified from an in vitro murine 
macrophage cytotoxicity screen, provided mice with 40 to 60% protection against 
pneumonic plague when administered at the time of infection for 1 to 3 days. In 
the present study, the therapeutic potential of these drugs against pneumonic 
plague in mice was further evaluated when they were administered at up to 48 h 
postinfection. While the efficacy of TFP was somewhat diminished as treatment 
was delayed to 24 h, the protection of mice with AXPN and DXP increased as 
treatment was progressively delayed to 24 h. At 48 h postinfection, these drugs 
provided the animals with significant protection (up to 100%) against challenge 
with the agent of pneumonic or bubonic plague when they were administered in 
combination with levofloxacin. Likewise, when they were used in combination with 
vancomycin, all three drugs provided mice with 80 to 100% protection from fatal 
oral Clostridium difficile infection when they were administered at 24 h 
postinfection. Furthermore, AXPN provided 40 to 60% protection against 
respiratory infection with Klebsiella pneumoniae when it was administered at the 
time of infection or at 24 h postinfection. Using the same in vitro cytotoxicity 
assay, we identified an additional 76/780 nonantibiotic drugs effective against 
K. pneumoniae For Acinetobacter baumannii, 121 nonantibiotic drugs were 
identified to inhibit bacterium-induced cytotoxicity in murine macrophages. Of 
these 121 drugs, 13 inhibited the macrophage cytotoxicity induced by two 
additional multiple-antibiotic-resistant strains. Six of these drugs decreased 
the intracellular survival of all three A. baumannii strains in macrophages. 
These results provided further evidence of the broad applicability and 
utilization of drug repurposing screening to identify new therapeutics to combat 
multidrug-resistant pathogens of public health concern.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01943-17
PMCID: PMC5740341
PMID: 29109161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


630. J Invest Surg. 2020 Dec;33(10):887-895. doi: 10.1080/08941939.2019.1571129. Epub 
2019 Mar 20.

Development of a Standardized Scoring System to Assess a Murine Model of 
Clostridium difficile Colitis.

Shelby RD(1), Tengberg N(1), Conces M(2), Olson JK(1), Navarro JB(3), Bailey 
MT(3), Goodman SD(3), Besner GE(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Perinatal Research, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatric Surgery, Nationwide Children's 
Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Center for Microbial Pathogenesis, The Research Institute at Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Background: Clostridium difficile infection is the most common cause of 
antimicrobial-associated diarrhea. Our aim was to introduce a novel and 
efficient clinical sickness score (CSS), and to define a detailed histologic 
injury score (HIS) in a murine model of C. difficile colitis. Methods: Mice 
received an antibiotic cocktail (kanamycin, gentamicin, colistin, metronidazole, 
and vancomycin) for 96 h. After 48 h, mice received an intraperitoneal injection 
of clindamycin, followed by oral C. difficile (1.5 × 107 CFU). Signs of sickness 
were scored using a novel CSS (range 0-12) with scores ≥6 consistent with C. 
difficile colitis. Intestinal tissue was analyzed utilizing an adapted HIS 
(range 0-9) with scores ≥4 consistent with C. difficile colitis. Stool was 
analyzed for C. difficile, and survival evaluated. Results: No control mice 
showed signs of sickness, whereas 23% of mice receiving antibiotics alone and 
65% of mice exposed to antibiotics and subsequently C. difficile demonstrated 
signs of sickness (p = 0.0134). No control mice had histologic injury, whereas 
8% of mice receiving antibiotics alone and 75% of mice exposed to antibiotics 
followed by C. difficile had evidence of histologic injury (p = 0.0001). Mice 
exposed to C. difficile lost more weight, although not significant (p = 0.070). 
Mice that received C. difficile had decreased survival compared to control mice 
and mice receiving antibiotics only (p = 0.03). Conclusions: We have developed a 
novel clinical scoring system, and detailed histological grading system, that 
enables the objective evaluation of a murine C. difficile colitis model. This 
model allows the study of this disease in a host that demonstrates clinical and 
histologic signs comparable to human C. difficile infection. This will allow for 
improved study of therapeutics for this disease in the future.

DOI: 10.1080/08941939.2019.1571129
PMID: 30892111


631. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2016 Sep 22;6:99. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00099. 
eCollection 2016.

Characterization of the Adherence of Clostridium difficile Spores: The Integrity 
of the Outermost Layer Affects Adherence Properties of Spores of the Epidemic 
Strain R20291 to Components of the Intestinal Mucosa.

Mora-Uribe P(1), Miranda-Cárdenas C(2), Castro-Córdova P(1), Gil F(2), Calderón 
I(3), Fuentes JA(3), Rodas PI(4), Banawas S(5), Sarker MR(6), Paredes-Sabja 
D(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres 
BelloSantiago, Chile; Center for Bioinformatics and Integrative Biology, 
Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres BelloSantiago, Chile.
(2)Microbiota-Host Interactions and Clostridia Research Group, Departamento de 
Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres Bello 
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Laboratorio de Genética y Patogénesis Bacteriana, Departamento de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres Bello Santiago, 
Chile.
(4)Facultad de Medicina, Center for Integrative Medicine and Innovative 
Sciences, Universidad Andres Bello Santiago, Chile.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Oregon State UniversityCorvallis, OR, USA; 
Medical Laboratories Department, College of Science Al-Zulfi, Majmaah 
UniversityAl Majma'ah, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Oregon State University Corvallis, OR, 
USA.

Clostridium difficile is the causative agent of the most frequently reported 
nosocomial diarrhea worldwide. The high incidence of recurrent infection is the 
main clinical challenge of C. difficile infections (CDI). Formation of C. 
difficile spores of the epidemic strain R20291 has been shown to be essential 
for recurrent infection and transmission of the disease in a mouse model. 
However, the underlying mechanisms of how these spores persist in the colonic 
environment remains unclear. In this work, we characterized the adherence 
properties of epidemic R20291 spores to components of the intestinal mucosa, and 
we assessed the role of the exosporium integrity in the adherence properties by 
using cdeC mutant spores with a defective exosporium layer. Our results showed 
that spores and vegetative cells of the epidemic R20291 strain adhered at high 
levels to monolayers of Caco-2 cells and mucin. Transmission electron 
micrographs of Caco-2 cells demonstrated that the hair-like projections on the 
surface of R20291 spores are in close proximity with the plasma membrane and 
microvilli of undifferentiated and differentiated monolayers of Caco-2 cells. 
Competitive-binding assay in differentiated Caco-2 cells suggests that 
spore-adherence is mediated by specific binding sites. By using spores of a cdeC 
mutant we demonstrated that the integrity of the exosporium layer determines the 
affinity of adherence of C. difficile spores to Caco-2 cells and mucin. Binding 
of fibronectin and vitronectin to the spore surface was concentration-dependent, 
and depending on the concentration, spore-adherence to Caco-2 cells was 
enhanced. In the presence of an aberrantly-assembled exosporium (cdeC spores), 
binding of fibronectin, but not vitronectin, was increased. Notably, independent 
of the exosporium integrity, only a fraction of the spores had fibronectin and 
vitronectin molecules binding to their surface. Collectively, these results 
demonstrate that the integrity of the exosporium layer of strain R20291 
contributes to selective spore adherence to components of the intestinal mucosa.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00099
PMCID: PMC5031699
PMID: 27713865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


632. Vaccine. 2015 Mar 24;33(13):1586-95. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.02.006. Epub 
2015 Feb 16.

The recombinant Lactococcus lactis oral vaccine induces protection against C. 
difficile spore challenge in a mouse model.

Guo S(1), Yan W(2), McDonough SP(2), Lin N(2), Wu KJ(2), He H(3), Xiang H(4), 
Yang M(5), Moreira MA(6), Chang YF(7).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA; 
College of Food Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, 
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA; 
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA; 
Veterinary Institute, Guangdong Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Guangzhou, 
China.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA; 
Guizhou Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Guizhou Academy 
of Agriculture Sciences, Guiyang, China.
(6)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA; 6 
Sector de Medicina Veterinária Preventiva e Saúde Pública, Departamento de 
Veterinária, Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, MG, Brazil.
(7)College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. 
Electronic address: yc42@cornell.edu.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) causes nosocomial antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea and colitis in the developed world. Two potent cytotoxins, toxin A 
(TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB) are the virulence factors of this disease and can be a 
good vaccine candidate against CDI. In the present study, we genetically 
engineered Lactococcus lactis to express the nontoxic, recombinant fragments 
derived from TcdA and TcdB C-terminal receptor binding domains (Tcd-AC and 
Tcd-BC) as an oral vaccine candidate. The immunogenicity of the genetically 
engineered L. lactis oral vaccine delivery system (animal groups LAC and LBC or 
the combination of both, LACBC) was compared with the recombinant TcdA and TcdB 
C-terminal receptor binding domain proteins (animal groups PAC and PBC or the 
combination of both, PACBC), which were expressed and purified from E. coli. 
After the C. difficile challenge, the control groups received PBS or engineered 
L. lactis with empty vector, showed severe diarrhea symptoms and died within 2-3 
days. However, both the oral vaccine and recombinant protein vaccine groups had 
significantly lower mortalities, body weight decreases and histopathologic 
lesions than the control sham-vaccine groups (p<0.05) except group LBC which 
only had a 31% survival rate after the challenge. The data of post infection 
survival showed that an average of 86% of animals survived in groups PAC and 
PACBC, 75% of animals survived in group LACBC, and 65% of animals survived in 
group LAC. All of the vaccinated animals produced higher titers of both IgG and 
IgA than the control groups (p<0.05), and the antibodies were able to neutralize 
the cytopathic effect of toxins in vitro. The results of this study indicate 
that there is a potential to use L. lactis as a delivery system to develop a 
cost effective oral vaccine against CDI.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.02.006
PMID: 25698490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


633. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Apr;92(4):411-27. doi: 10.1007/s00109-013-1117-y. Epub 
2013 Dec 22.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase/IκB kinase/NF-κB-dependent and AP-1-independent 
CX3CL1 expression in intestinal epithelial cells stimulated with Clostridium 
difficile toxin A.

Ko SH(1), Jeon JI, Kim H, Kim YJ, Youn J, Kim JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Department of Biomedical Science, Hanyang 
University College of Medicine and Graduate School of Biomedical Science and 
Engineering, 17 Haengdang-dong, Sungdong-gu, Seoul, 133-791, South Korea.

Clostridium difficile toxin A causes acute colitis associated with inflammatory 
cell infiltration and increased production of proinflammatory mediators. 
Although CX3CL1 (fractalkine) plays a role in chemoattracting 
monocytes/macrophages, NK cells, and T cells, little information is available on 
the regulated expression of CX3CL1 in response to toxin A stimulation. In this 
study, we investigated the role of C. difficile toxin A on CX3CL1 induction in 
intestinal epithelial cells. Stimulation of murine intestinal epithelial cells 
with toxin A resulted in the upregulation of CX3CL1. Expression of CX3CL1 was 
dependent on nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-κB) and IκB kinase (IKK) activation, 
while the suppression of activator protein-1 (AP-1) did not affect toxin 
A-induced CX3CL1 expression. Suppression of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK) significantly inhibited IKK-NF-κB signaling leading to CX3CL1 induction 
in C. difficile toxin A-stimulated cells. CX3CL1 was mainly secreted from the 
basolateral surfaces in toxin A-treated cells. Furthermore, inhibition of p38 
activity attenuated the toxin A-induced upregulation of CX3CL1 in the mouse 
ileum in vivo. These results suggest that a pathway, including p38 MAPK, IKK, 
and NF-κB activation, is required for CX3CL1 induction in intestinal epithelial 
cells exposed to C. difficile toxin A and may regulate the development of 
intestinal inflammation induced by infection with toxigenic C. difficile.
KEY MESSAGE: C. difficile toxin A causes colitis with inflammatory cell 
infiltration. CX3CL1 plays a role in chemoattracting immune cells. MAPK-NF-κB 
signaling is required for CX3CL1 induction in toxin A-exposed cells. CX3CL1 is 
mainly secreted from the basolateral surfaces. CX3CL1 may contribute to the 
regulation of toxigenic C. difficile infection.

DOI: 10.1007/s00109-013-1117-y
PMID: 24362517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


634. BMC Gastroenterol. 2013 Jul 17;13:117. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-13-117.

The protective effect of recombinant Lactococcus lactis oral vaccine on a 
Clostridium difficile-infected animal model.

Yang XQ(1), Zhao YG, Chen XQ, Jiang B, Sun DY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital of Guangzhou Military 
Command of People’s Liberation Army, Guangzhou 510010, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Oral immunization with vaccines may be an effective strategy for 
prevention of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). However, application of 
previously developed vaccines for preventing CDI has been limited due to various 
reasons. Here, we developed a recombinant Lactococcus lactis oral vaccine and 
evaluated its effect on a C. difficile-infected animal model established in 
golden hamsters in attempt to provide an alternative strategy for CDI 
prevention.
METHODS: Recombinant L. lactis vaccine was developed using the pTRKH2 plasmid, a 
high-copy-number Escherichia coli-L. shuttle vector: 1) L. lactis expressing 
secreted proteins was constructed with recombinant pTRKH2 (secreted-protein 
plasmid) carrying the Usp45 signal peptide (SPUsp45), nontoxic adjuvanted 
tetanus toxin fragment C (TETC), and 14 of the 38 C-terminal repeats (14CDTA) of 
nontoxic C. difficile toxin A (TcdA); and 2) L. lactis expressing secreted and 
membrane proteins was constructed with recombinant pTRKH2 (membrane-anchored 
plasmid) carrying SPUsp45, TETC, 14CDTA, and the cell wall-anchored sequence of 
protein M6 (cwaM6). Then, 32 male Syrian golden hamsters were randomly divided 
into 4 groups (n = 8 each) for gavage of normal saline (blank control) and L. 
lactis carrying the empty shuttle vector, secreted-protein plasmid, and 
membrane-anchored plasmid, respectively. After 1-week gavage of clindamycin, the 
animals were administered with C. difficile spore suspension. General symptoms 
and intestinal pathological changes of the animals were examined by naked eye 
and microscopy, respectively. Protein levels of anti-TcdA IgG/IgA antibodies in 
intestinal tissue and fluid were analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA). A cell culture cytotoxicity neutralization assay was done by TcdA 
treatment with or without anti-TcdA serum pre-incubation or treatment. Apoptosis 
of intestinal epithelial cells was examined by flow cytometry (FL) assay. 
Expression of mucosal inflammatory cytokines in the animals was detected by 
polymer chain reaction (PCR) assay.
RESULTS: After the C. difficile challenge, the animals of control group had 
severe diarrhea symptoms on day 1 and all died on day 4, indicating that the CDI 
animal model was established in hamster. Of the 3 immunization groups, 
secreted-protein and membrane-anchored plasmid groups had significantly lower 
mortalities, body weight decreases, and pathological scores, with higher 
survival rate/time than the empty plasmid group (P < 0.05). The tilter of IgG 
antibody directed against TcdA was significantly higher in serum and intestinal 
fluid of secreted-protein and membrane-anchored plasmid groups than in the empty 
plasmid group (P < 0.05) while the corresponding titer of IgA antibody directed 
against TcdA had no substantial differences (P > 0.05). The anti-TcdA serum of 
membrane-anchored plasmid group neutralized the cytotoxicity of 200 ng/ml TcdA 
with the best protective effect achieved by anti-TcdA serum pre-incubation. The 
incidences of TcdA-induced death and apoptosis of intestinal epithelial cells 
were significantly reduced by cell pre-incubation or treatment with anti-TcdA 
serum of membrane-anchored plasmid group (P < 0.05). MCP-1, ICAM-1, IL-6, and 
Gro-1 mRNA expression levels were the lowest in cecum tissue of the 
membrane-anchored groups compared to the other groups.
CONCLUSION: Recombinant L. lactis live vaccine is effective for preventing CDI 
in the hamster model, thus providing an alternative for immunization of C. 
difficile-associated diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-230X-13-117
PMCID: PMC3750240
PMID: 23865596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


635. Gut. 1997 Nov;41(5):642-5. doi: 10.1136/gut.41.5.642.

Antisecretory factor suppresses intestinal inflammation and hypersecretion.

Johansson E(1), Jennische E, Lange S, Lönnroth I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Gothenburg, 
Sweden.

Comment in
    Gut. 1997 Nov;41(5):719-20.

BACKGROUND: Antisecretory factor (AF) is a recently identified regulatory 
protein which inhibits the intestinal fluid secretion induced by cholera toxin.
AIMS: To test the effect of AF on: (a) inflammation and hypersecretion induced 
by toxin A from Clostridium difficile; and (b) morphological changes and 
hypersecretion induced by okadaic acid (the blue mussel toxin) in rat intestinal 
mucosa.
METHODS: Morphological changes and fluid accumulation were observed in 
intestinal loops challenged with 1 microgram of toxin A or 3 micrograms of 
okadaic acid administered before or after injection of 0.1 microgram of 
recombinant AF (rAF).
RESULTS: The cytotoxic and inflammatory reaction caused by toxin A was abolished 
after treatment with rAF given either intraveneously or intraluminally prior to 
the toxin or one hour after the toxin. The intestinal fluid response induced by 
toxin A and okadaic acid was reduced 55-80% by rAF. However, the characteristic 
increase in goblet cells at the tips of villi in the okadaic acid treated mucosa 
was not inhibited by rAF.
CONCLUSION: Results suggest that AF might be involved in protection against 
inflammation and in counteracting dehydration caused by enterotoxins. Both 
effects are probably mediated via the enteric nervous system.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.41.5.642
PMCID: PMC1891580
PMID: 9414971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


636. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 17;275(11):7764-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.275.11.7764.

A Rho-related GTPase is involved in Ca(2+)-dependent neurotransmitter 
exocytosis.

Doussau F(1), Gasman S, Humeau Y, Vitiello F, Popoff M, Boquet P, Bader MF, 
Poulain B.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie Cellulaire, CNRS, UPR 9009, France.

Rho, Rac, and Cdc42 monomeric GTPases are well known regulators of the actin 
cytoskeleton and phosphoinositide metabolism and have been implicated in hormone 
secretion in endocrine cells. Here, we examine their possible implication in 
Ca(2+)-dependent exocytosis of neurotransmitters. Using subcellular 
fractionation procedures, we found that RhoA, RhoB, Rac1, and Cdc42 are present 
in rat brain synaptosomes; however, only Rac1 was associated with highly 
purified synaptic vesicles. To determine the synaptic function of these GTPases, 
toxins that impair Rho-related proteins were microinjected into Aplysia neurons. 
We used lethal toxin from Clostridium sordellii, which inactivates Rac; toxin B 
from Clostridium difficile, which inactivates Rho, Rac, and Cdc42; and C3 
exoenzyme from Clostridium botulinum and cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 from 
Escherichia coli, which mainly affect Rho. Analysis of the toxin effects on 
evoked acetylcholine release revealed that a member of the Rho family, most 
likely Rac1, was implicated in the control of neurotransmitter release. 
Strikingly, blockage of acetylcholine release by lethal toxin and toxin B could 
be completely removed in <1 s by high frequency stimulation of nerve terminals. 
Further characterization of the inhibitory action produced by lethal toxin 
suggests that Rac1 protein regulates a late step in Ca(2+)-dependent 
neuroexocytosis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.275.11.7764
PMID: 10713089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


637. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):14771-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M201072200. Epub 2002 
Feb 14.

Interaction of the Rho-ADP-ribosylating C3 exoenzyme with RalA.

Wilde C(1), Barth H, Sehr P, Han L, Schmidt M, Just I, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie der 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Otto-Krayer-Haus, Albertstrasse 25, D-79104 
Freiburg, Germany.

RhoA, -B, and -C are ADP-ribosylated and biologically inactivated by Clostridium 
botulinum C3 exoenzyme and related C3-like transferases. We report that RalA 
GTPase, which is not ADP-ribosylated by C3, inhibits ADP-ribosylation of RhoA by 
C3 from C. botulinum (C3bot), Clostridium limosum (C3lim), and Bacillus cereus 
(C3cer) but not from Staphylococcus aureus (C3stau) in human platelet membranes 
and rat brain lysate. Inhibition by RalA occurs with the GDP- and guanosine 
5'-3-O-(thio)triphosphate-bound forms of RalA and is overcome by increasing 
concentrations of C3. A direct interaction of RalA with C3 was verified by 
precipitation of the transferase with GST-RalA-Sepharose. The affinity constant 
(K(d)) of the binding of RalA to C3lim was 12 nm as determined by fluorescence 
titration. RalA increased the NAD glycohydrolase activity of C3bot by about 
5-fold. Although RalA had no effect on glucosylation of Rho GTPases by 
Clostridium difficile toxin B, C3bot and C3lim inhibited glucosylation of RalA 
by Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin. Furthermore, C3bot decreased activation 
of phospholipase D by RalA. The data indicate that several C3 exoenzymes 
directly interact with RalA without ADP-ribosylating the GTPase. The interaction 
is of high affinity and interferes with essential functions of C3 and RalA.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M201072200
PMID: 11847234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


638. Immunology. 1997 Jun;91(2):281-8. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.1997.00243.x.

The involvement of macrophage-derived tumour necrosis factor and lipoxygenase 
products on the neutrophil recruitment induced by Clostridium difficile toxin B.

Souza MH(1), Melo-Filho AA, Rocha MF, Lyerly DM, Cunha FQ, Lima AA, Ribeiro RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology/Clinical Research Unit-HUWC, 
Federal University of Ceará, Fortaleza-CE, Brazil.

Clostridium difficile (Cd) toxins appear to mediate the inflammatory response in 
pseudomembranous colitis and/or colitis associated with the use of antibiotics. 
In contrast to Cd Toxin A (TxA), Cd Toxin B (TxB) has been reported not to 
promote fluid secretion or morphological damage in rabbits and hamsters and also 
does not induce neutrophil chemotaxis in vitro. However, TxB is about 1000 times 
more potent than TxA in stimulating the release of tumour necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-alpha) by cultured monocytes. In the present study, we investigated the 
ability of TxB to promote neutrophil migration into peritoneal cavities and 
subcutaneous air-pouches of rats. We also examined the role of resident 
peritoneal cells in this process as well as the inflammatory mediators involved. 
TxB caused a significant and dose-dependent neutrophil influx with a maximal 
response at 0.1 microgram/cavity after 4 hr. Depleting the peritoneal resident 
cell population by washing the peritoneal cavity or increasing this population 
by pretreating the animals with thioglycollate blocked and amplified the 
TxB-induced neutrophil migration, respectively. Pretreating the animals with 
MK886 (a lipoxygenase inhibitor), NDGA (a dual cyclo- and lipoxygenase 
inhibitor) or the glucocorticoid, dexamethasone, but not with indomethacin (a 
cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor), or BN52021 (a platelet-activating factor 
antagonist), inhibited the neutrophil migration evoked by TxB. Pretreatment with 
dexamethasone or the administration of anti-TNF-alpha serum into the air-pouches 
also significantly reduced the TxB-induced neutrophil migration. Supernatants 
from TxB-stimulated macrophages induced neutrophil migration when injected into 
the rat peritoneal cavity. This effect was attenuated by the addition of either 
MK886 or dexamethasone to the macrophage monolayer and by preincubating the 
supernatants with anti-TNF-alpha serum. TxB also stimulated the release of 
TNF-alpha by macrophages. Overall, these results suggest that TxB induces an 
intense neutrophil migration which is mediated by macrophage-derived TNF-alpha 
and lipoxygenase products.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2567.1997.00243.x
PMCID: PMC1363859
PMID: 9227329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


639. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 12;285(11):8104-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055079. Epub 
2010 Jan 14.

BetaPix up-regulates Na+/H+ exchanger 3 through a Shank2-mediated 
protein-protein interaction.

Lee JS(1), Lee YM, Kim JY, Park HW, Grinstein S, Orlowski J, Kim E, Kim KH, Lee 
MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, 
Institute of Gastroenterology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
120-752, Korea.

Na(+)/H(+) exchanger 3 (NHE3) plays an important role in neutral Na(+) transport 
in mammalian epithelial cells. The Rho family of small GTPases and the PDZ 
(PSD-95/discs large/ZO-1) domain-based adaptor Shank2 are known to regulate the 
membrane expression and activity of NHE3. In this study we examined the role of 
betaPix, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the Rho GTPase and a strong 
binding partner to Shank2, in NHE3 regulation using integrated molecular and 
physiological approaches. Immunoprecipitation and pulldown assays revealed that 
NHE3, Shank2, and betaPix form a macromolecular complex when expressed 
heterologously in mammalian cells as well as endogenously in rat colon, kidney, 
and pancreas. In addition, these proteins co-segregated at the apical surface of 
rat colonic epithelial cells, as detected by immunofluorescence staining. When 
expressed in PS120/NHE3 cells, betaPix increased membrane expression and basal 
activity of NHE3. Interestingly, the effects of betaPix on NHE3 were abolished 
by cotransfection with dominant-negative Shank2 mutants and by treatment with 
Clostridium difficile toxin B, a Rho GTPase inhibitor, indicating that Shank2 
and Rho GTPases are involved in betaPix-mediated NHE3 regulation. Knockdown of 
endogenous betaPix by RNA interference decreased Shank2-induced increase of NHE3 
membrane expression in HEK 293T cells. These results indicate that betaPix 
up-regulates NHE3 membrane expression and activity by Shank2-mediated 
protein-protein interaction and by activating Rho GTPases in the apical regions 
of epithelial cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.055079
PMCID: PMC2832961
PMID: 20080968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


640. Gastroenterology. 1995 Aug;109(2):516-23. doi: 10.1016/0016-5085(95)90340-2.

Trefoil peptide protection of intestinal epithelial barrier function: 
cooperative interaction with mucin glycoprotein.

Kindon H(1), Pothoulakis C, Thim L, Lynch-Devaney K, Podolsky DK.

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Goblet cells secrete a combination of trefoil peptides and 
mucin glycoproteins to form a continuous gel on the mucosal surface. The 
functional effects of these products remain uncertain.
METHODS: Trefoil peptides and/or mucin glycoproteins were added to Transwell 
monolayers of the human colonic cancer-derived T84 cell line. Intact monolayers 
permitted penetration of < 4% of the inert marker [3H]mannitol at 4 hours. 
Exposure to the toxic lectin phytohemagglutinin (1 mg/mL), oleic acid (8 mmol/L) 
and taurocholic acid (12 mmol/L), or Clostridium difficile toxin A (0.7 
microgram/mL) resulted in loss of barrier function with 36%, 62%, and 45% of 
[3H]mannitol penetration, respectively.
RESULTS: Addition of recombinant human intestinal trefoil factor in 
physiological concentrations (1-5 micrograms/microL) resulted in attenuation of 
the damage to monolayer integrity by up to 52%. Protection was enhanced (up to 
95%) by the copresence of human colonic mucin glycoproteins. Similar effects 
were observed when rat intestinal trefoil factor or human spasmolysin, another 
human trefoil peptide, were added alone or in the presence of human mucin 
glycoproteins. Conversely, mucin glycoproteins isolated from the rat colon or 
stomach facilitated protection when added with human spasmolysin or human 
intestinal trefoil factor.
CONCLUSIONS: Trefoil peptides and mucin glycoproteins protect gastrointestinal 
mucosa from a variety of insults.

DOI: 10.1016/0016-5085(95)90340-2
PMID: 7615201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


641. J Immunol. 2001 Feb 1;166(3):1627-34. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.3.1627.

Rac and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase regulate the protein kinase B in Fc 
epsilon RI signaling in RBL 2H3 mast cells.

Djouder N(1), Schmidt G, Frings M, Cavalié A, Thelen M, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie der Universität Freiburg, 
Freiburg, Germany.

FcepsilonRI signaling in rat basophilic leukemia cells depends on 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) and the small GTPase Rac. Here, we 
studied the functional relationship among PI3-kinase, its effector protein 
kinase B (PKB), and Rac using inhibitors of PI3-kinase and toxins inhibiting 
Rac. Wortmannin, an inhibitor of PI3-kinase, blocked FcepsilonRI-mediated 
tyrosine phosphorylation of phospholipase Cgamma, inositol phosphate formation, 
calcium mobilization, and secretion of hexosaminidase. Similarly, Clostridium 
difficile toxin B, which inactivates all Rho GTPases including Rho, Rac and 
Cdc42, and Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin, which inhibits Rac (possibly 
Cdc42) but not Rho, blocked these responses. Stimulation of the FcepsilonRI 
receptor induced a rapid increase in the GTP-bound form of Rac. Whereas toxin B 
inhibited the Rac activation, PI3-kinase inhibitors (wortmannin and LY294002) 
had no effect on activation of Rac. In line with this, wortmannin had no effect 
on tyrosine phosphorylation of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav. 
Wortmannin, toxin B, and lethal toxin inhibited phosphorylation of PKB on 
Ser(473). Similarly, translocation of the pleckstrin homology domain of PKB 
tagged with the green fluorescent protein to the membrane, which was induced by 
activation of the FcepsilonRI receptor, was blocked by inhibitors of PI3-kinase 
and Rac inactivation. Our results indicate that in rat basophilic leukemia cells 
Rac and PI3-kinase regulate PKB and suggest that Rac is functionally located 
upstream and/or parallel of PI3-kinase/PKB in FcepsilonRI signaling.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.3.1627
PMID: 11160204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


642. Vet Microbiol. 2009 Oct 20;139(1-2):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.05.002. 
Epub 2009 May 19.

Portrait of a canine probiotic Bifidobacterium--from gut to gut.

O'Mahony D(1), Murphy KB, MacSharry J, Boileau T, Sunvold G, Reinhart G, Kiely 
B, Shanahan F, O'Mahony L.

Author information:
(1)Alimentary Health Ltd., National University of Ireland, Cork, Ireland.

The gastrointestinal environment is a complex interactive system involving the 
host, ingested dietary components, and numerous microbial species. We 
hypothesized that isolation and screening of Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria 
adherent to healthy canine gastrointestinal tissue would yield strains with 
commensal activity in canines. The aims of this study were (1) to isolate a bank 
of commensal organisms from the canine gastrointestinal tract; (2) to screen 
these novel microbial isolates for potential probiotic effects; (3) to select 
one organism from these screens and test its impact on the canine microbiota. 
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) were isolated from resected canine gastrointestinal 
tissue and screened in vitro for putative probiotic activities. Murine studies 
examined gastrointestinal transit and inhibition of Salmonella typhimurium 
translocation. One strain was progressed to a canine study where its impact on 
the gastrointestinal microbiota was determined. Of the 420 isolates from the 
canine gut, 62 strains were characterised as LAB. Following assessment of the 
strain bank with regard to pH sensitivity, bile resistance, pathogen inhibition 
and survival following freeze-drying, four Lactobacillus strains and two 
Bifidobacteria strains were selected for further examination. Bifidobacterium 
animalis AHC7 adhered to epithelial cells, transited the murine gastrointestinal 
tract to high numbers and significantly reduced S. typhimurium translocation. B. 
animalis AHC7 consumption significantly reduced the carriage of Clostridia, in 
particular Clostridium difficile, in dogs. This study describes the isolation 
and screening of canine-derived bacterial strains with commensal traits. The 
results demonstrate that B. animalis AHC7 has significant potential for 
improving canine gastrointestinal health.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.05.002
PMID: 19523775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


643. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2017 Dec;63:16-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2017.09.004. Epub 
2017 Sep 20.

MiR-194 is involved in morphogenesis of spiral ganglion neurons in inner ear by 
rearranging actin cytoskeleton via targeting RhoB.

Du J(1), Zhang X(2), Cao H(2), Jiang D(2), Wang X(2), Zhou W(3), Chen K(2), Zhou 
J(4), Jiang H(5), Ba L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University, 37 Guoxue Lane, Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, 58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, 58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China; Department of 
Otolaryngology, People's Hospital of Meishan, Meishan, Sichuan, 620010, China.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.
(5)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, 58 Zhongshan Road II, Guangzhou, 510080, China. Electronic address: 
jhongy@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, People's Hospital of the Tibet Autonomous 
Region, Lasha, China. Electronic address: bhanor@163.com.

Many microRNAs participate in the development, differentiation and function 
preservation of the embryonic and adult inner ear, but many details still need 
to be elucidated regarding the numerous microRNAs in the inner ear. Based on 
previous investigations on the microRNA profile in the inner ear, we confirmed 
that several microRNAs are expressed in the inner ear, and we detected the 
spatial expression of these microRNAs in the neonatal mouse inner ear. Then we 
focused on miR-194 for its specific expression with a dynamic spatiotemporal 
pattern during inner ear development. Overexpression of miR-194 in cultured 
spiral ganglion cells significantly affected the dendrites of differentiated 
neurons, with more branching and obviously dispersed nerve fibres. Furthermore, 
the cytoskeleton of cultured cells was markedly affected, as disordered actin 
filaments resulting from miR-194 overexpression and enhanced filaments resulting 
from miR-194 knockdown were observed. Together with the bioinformatic methods, 
the RT-qPCR and western blot results showed that RhoB is a candidate target of 
miR-194 in the morphogenesis of spiral ganglion neurons. Additionally, the 
double luciferase reporter system was used to identify RhoB as a novel target of 
miR-194. Finally, the inhibition of RhoB activation by Clostridium difficile 
toxin B disturbed the organization of the actin filament, similar to the effects 
of miR-194 overexpression. In summary, we investigated microRNA expression in 
the mouse inner ear, and demonstrated that miR-194 is dynamically expressed 
during inner ear development; importantly, we found that miR-194 affects neuron 
morphogenesis positively through Rho B-mediated F-actin rearrangement.

Copyright © 2017 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2017.09.004
PMID: 28941704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


644. Sci Transl Med. 2021 Feb 24;13(582):eabc4822. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abc4822.

Functional reconstruction of human AML reveals stem cell origin and 
vulnerability of treatment-resistant MLL-rearranged leukemia.

Zeisig BB(1)(2), Fung TK(1)(2), Zarowiecki M(1), Tsai CT(1), Luo H(3), 
Stanojevic B(1)(4), Lynn C(1), Leung AYH(5), Zuna J(6), Zaliova M(6), Bornhauser 
M(7), von Bonin M(7), Lenhard B(8)(9)(10), Huang S(11), Mufti GJ(1)(2), So 
CWE(12)(2).

Author information:
(1)Leukaemia and Stem Cell Biology Group, School of Cancer and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, King's College, London SE5 9NU, UK.
(2)Department of Haematological Medicine, King's College Hospital, London SE5 
9RS, UK.
(3)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Penn 
State Cancer Institute, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, 
Hershey, PA 17033, USA.
(4)Laboratory for Radiobiology and Molecular Genetics, Vinca Institute of 
Nuclear Science, University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, HKSAR, 
China.
(6)CLIP, Department of Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, 150 06 Prague 5, 
Czech Republic.
(7)Department of Medicine, University Hospital, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(8)Institute of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, 
London W12 0NN, UK.
(9)Computational Regulatory Genomics, MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, 
London W12 0NN, UK.
(10)Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology, University of 
Bergen, N-5008 Bergen, Norway.
(11)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Penn 
State Cancer Institute, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, 
Hershey, PA 17033, USA. eric.so@kcl.ac.uk shuang4@pennstatehealth.psu.edu.
(12)Leukaemia and Stem Cell Biology Group, School of Cancer and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, King's College, London SE5 9NU, UK. eric.so@kcl.ac.uk 
shuang4@pennstatehealth.psu.edu.

Chemoresistance remains the major challenge for successful treatment of acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML). Although recent mouse studies suggest that treatment 
response of genetically and immunophenotypically indistinguishable AML can be 
influenced by their different cells of origin, corresponding evidence in human 
disease is still largely lacking. By combining prospective disease modeling 
using highly purified human hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells with 
retrospective deconvolution study of leukemia stem cells (LSCs) from primary 
patient samples, we identified human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and common 
myeloid progenitors (CMPs) as two distinctive origins of human AML driven by 
Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene fusions (MLL-AML). Despite LSCs from either 
MLL-rearranged HSCs or MLL-rearranged CMPs having a mature CD34-/lo/CD38+ 
immunophenotype in both a humanized mouse model and primary patient samples, the 
resulting AML cells exhibited contrasting responses to chemotherapy. HSC-derived 
MLL-AML was highly resistant to chemotherapy and expressed elevated amounts of 
the multispecific anion transporter ABCC3. Inhibition of ABCC3 by shRNA-mediated 
knockdown or with small-molecule inhibitor fidaxomicin, currently used for 
diarrhea associated with Clostridium difficile infection, effectively 
resensitized HSC-derived MLL-AML toward standard chemotherapeutic drugs. This 
study not only functionally established two distinctive origins of human LSCs 
for MLL-AML and their role in mediating chemoresistance but also identified a 
potential therapeutic avenue for stem cell-associated treatment resistance by 
repurposing a well-tolerated antidiarrhea drug already used in the clinic.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abc4822
PMID: 33627486


645. Gastroenterology. 2002 Aug;123(2):505-15. doi: 10.1053/gast.2002.34783.

Corticotropin-releasing hormone antagonists possess anti-inflammatory effects in 
the mouse ileum.

Wlk M(1), Wang CC, Venihaki M, Liu J, Zhao D, Anton PM, Mykoniatis A, Pan A, 
Zacks J, Karalis K, Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) released at local sites 
of inflammation promotes inflammation in the periphery. We investigated its 
effects in the intestinal responses caused by toxin A from Clostridium 
difficile, the causative agent of antibiotic-associated colitis.
METHODS: Ileal loops were injected with 10 microg of toxin A, and enterotoxic 
responses were measured at various time points.
RESULTS: Pretreatment of mice with 2.5 microg/kg of the CRH receptor antagonist 
alpha-helical CRH((9-41)) that blocks both CRH receptor subtypes reduced toxin 
A-mediated ileal secretion, epithelial cell damage, mucosal edema, neutrophil 
infiltration, and mucosal content of interleukin 1 beta and tumor necrosis 
factor alpha. Pretreatment with the specific CRH(1) receptor antagonist 
antalarmin (20 mg/kg, IP) also inhibited toxin A-induced fluid secretion and 
toxin A-associated histologic changes. CRH messenger RNA and protein were 
increased in mouse ileum 30 minutes after intraluminal toxin A administration. 
In situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that toxin A at 1 
hour caused a substantial increase in the expression of both CRH receptor 
subtypes in the ileal mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: Peripheral CRH may play a proinflammatory role in toxin A-induced 
intestinal secretion and inflammation and that CRH(1) receptor, at least in 
part, is important in the mediation of these responses.

DOI: 10.1053/gast.2002.34783
PMID: 12145804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


646. Anaerobe. 2008 Oct;14(4):229-33. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2008.04.003. Epub 2008 
Apr 22.

Molecular analysis of the digestive microbiota in a gnotobiotic mouse model 
during antibiotic treatment: Influence of Saccharomyces boulardii.

Barc MC(1), Charrin-Sarnel C, Rochet V, Bourlioux F, Sandré C, Boureau H, Doré 
J, Collignon A.

Author information:
(1)Département de Microbiologie, Université Paris Sud-XI, Faculté de Pharmacie, 
EA 4043, Unité sous contrat INRA Ecosystème Microbien Digestif et Santé, 92296 
Châtenay-Malabry Cedex, France.

The probiotic Saccharomyces boulardii is a non-pathogenic yeast that has been 
proven efficient in the prevention of antimicrobial-associated diarrhea and of 
Clostridium difficile associated colitis. We evaluated the influence of the 
administration of S. boulardii on the composition of the fecal microbiota in a 
human microbiota-associated mouse model. This evaluation was run before, during 
and after a 7-day oral treatment with amoxicillin clavulanic acid. Predominant 
groups of bacteria were quantified with fluorescence in situ hybridization 
combined with flow cytometry using group-specific 16S rRNA targeted 
oligonucleotide probes designed for the Eubacteria, 
Bacteroides-Porphyromonas-Prevotella, Clostridium coccoides-Eubacterium rectale, 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Clostridium histolyticum, 
Lactobacillus-Enterococcus and Enterobacteriaceae groups and Bifidobacterium 
species. S. boulardii did not quantitatively alter the total anaerobic 
microbiota nor the dominant bacterial groups. During the antibiotic treatment in 
the two groups of mice receiving the yeast or not, the level of 
Enterobacteriaceae and Bacteroides groups increased when the C. coccoides-E. 
rectale group decreased dramatically. After the antibiotic treatment was 
discontinued, the return to the initial level was reached more rapidly in the S. 
boulardii-treated mice than in the control mice (p<0.05) for the C. coccoides-E. 
rectale and Bacteroides-Porphyromonas-Prevotella groups. This quicker recovery 
of normal intestinal microbiota equilibrium after antibiotic therapy could be a 
mechanism for S. boulardii preventive effect on antibiotic-associated diarrhea 
in humans.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2008.04.003
PMID: 18511310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


647. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 1;186(1):423-31. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000043. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

Protective roles of CX3CR1-mediated signals in toxin A-induced enteritis through 
the induction of heme oxygenase-1 expression.

Inui M(1), Ishida Y, Kimura A, Kuninaka Y, Mukaida N, Kondo T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical 
University, Wakayama, Japan.

The injection of Clostridium difficile toxin A into the ileal loops caused fluid 
accumulation with the destruction of intestinal epithelial structure and the 
recruitment of neutrophils and macrophages. Concomitantly, intraileal gene 
expression of CX3CL1/fractalkine (FKN) and its receptor, CX3CR1, was enhanced. 
When treated with toxin A in a similar manner, CX3CR1-deficient (CX3CR1(-/-)) 
mice exhibited exaggerated fluid accumulation, histopathological alterations, 
and neutrophil recruitment, but not macrophage infiltration. Mice reconstituted 
with CX3CR1(-/-) mouse-derived bone marrow cells exhibited exacerbated toxin 
A-induced enteritis, indicating that the lack of the CX3CR1 gene for 
hematopoietic cells aggravated toxin A-induced enteritis. A heme oxygenase-1 
(HO-1) inhibitor, tin-protoporphyrin-IX, markedly increased fluid accumulation 
in toxin A-treated wild-type mice, indicating the protective roles of HO-1 in 
this situation. HO-1 expression was detected mainly in F4/80-positive cells 
expressing CX3CR1, and CX3CR1(-/-) mice failed to increase HO-1 expression after 
toxin A treatment. Moreover, CX3CL1/FKN induced HO-1 gene expression by isolated 
lamina propria-derived macrophages or a mouse macrophage cell line, RAW264.7, 
through the activation of the ERK signal pathway. Thus, CX3CL1/FKN could induce 
CX3CR1-expressing macrophages to express HO-1, thereby ameliorating toxin 
A-induced enteritis.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000043
PMID: 21131421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


648. J Med Microbiol. 2013 Sep;62(Pt 9):1386-1393. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.056556-0. Epub 
2013 Mar 21.

Surface-layer (S-layer) of human and animal Clostridium difficile strains and 
their behaviour in adherence to epithelial cells and intestinal colonization.

Spigaglia P(1), Barketi-Klai A(2), Collignon A(2), Mastrantonio P(1), Barbanti 
F(1), Rupnik M(3)(4)(5), Janezic S(5), Kansau I(2).

Author information:
(1)Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy.
(2)EA 4043, USC INRA Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Paris-Sud 11, France.
(3)Centre of Excellence for Integrated Approaches in Chemistry and Biology of 
Proteins, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)University of Maribor, Faculty of Medicine, Maribor, Slovenia.
(5)Institute of Public Health Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia.

Clostridium difficile is a frequent cause of severe, recurrent post-antibiotic 
diarrhoea and pseudomembranous colitis. The surface layer (S-layer) is the 
predominant outer surface component of C. difficile which is involved in 
pathogen-host interactions critical to pathogenesis. In this study, we 
characterized the S-layer protein A (SlpA) of animal and human strains belonging 
to different PCR-ribotypes (PR) and compared the in vitro adherence and in vivo 
colonization properties of strains showing different SlpA variants. Since each 
SlpA variant has been recently associated with an S-layer cassette, we were able 
to deduce the cassette for each of our strains. In this study, an identity of 
99-100 % was found among the SlpA of isolates belonging to PR 012, 014/020, 045 
and 078. One exception was the SlpA of a poultry isolate, PR 014/020, which 
showed 99 % identity with that of strain 0160, another PR 014/020 which contains 
an S-layer cassette 6. Interestingly, this cassette has also been found in a PR 
018 strain, an emerging virulent type currently predominant in Italy. Five other 
SlpA variants (v014/020a-e) were identified in strains PR 014/020. In vitro 
adherence assays and in vivo colonization experiments were performed on five PR 
014/020 strains: human 1064 (v014/020e), human 4684/08 (v014/020b), human IT1106 
(v078a), poultry P30 (v014/020d) and poultry PB90 (v014/020b) strains. Adhesion 
assays indicate that C. difficile strains vary in their capacity to adhere to 
cells in culture and that adhesion seems to be independent of the SlpA variant. 
Colonization properties were assessed in vivo using a dixenic mouse model of 
colonization. The kinetics of faecal shedding and caecal colonization were 
similar when human 4684/08 (v014/020b) strain was compared with human 1064 
(v014/020e) and poultry PB90 (v014/020b) strain. In contrast, poultry P30 
(v014/020d) strain outcompeted both human 4684/08 (v014/020b) and IT1106 (v078a) 
strains and its adherence to caeca at day 7 was significantly higher. The 
peculiar characteristics of C. difficile P30 seem to advantage it in colonizing 
the intestinal mice niche, increasing its ability to compete and adapt. The 
results obtained underline the need of an increased attention to the genetic 
evolution of C. difficile to prevent and limit the consequences of the emergence 
of increasingly virulent strains.

DOI: 10.1099/jmm.0.056556-0
PMID: 23518658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


649. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2016 Oct 1;311(4):G610-G623. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00150.2016. Epub 2016 Aug 11.

Probiotic Saccharomyces boulardii CNCM I-745 prevents outbreak-associated 
Clostridium difficile-associated cecal inflammation in hamsters.

Koon HW(1), Su B(1), Xu C(2), Mussatto CC(1), Tran DH(1), Lee EC(1), Ortiz C(1), 
Wang J(1), Lee JE(1), Ho S(1), Chen X(3), Kelly CP(3), Pothoulakis C(4).

Author information:
(1)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Center, Division of Digestive Diseases, 
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California.
(2)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Center, Division of Digestive Diseases, 
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California; The Key Laboratory for Space Bioscience and Biotechnology, 
School of Life Sciences, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 
P.R. China.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; and.
(4)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Center, Division of Digestive Diseases, 
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, California; cpothoulakis@mednet.ucla.edu.

C. difficile infection (CDI) is a common debilitating nosocomial infection 
associated with high mortality. Several CDI outbreaks have been attributed to 
ribotypes 027, 017, and 078. Clinical and experimental evidence indicates that 
the nonpathogenic yeast Saccharomyces boulardii CNCM I-745 (S.b) is effective 
for the prevention of CDI. However, there is no current evidence suggesting this 
probiotic can protect from CDI caused by outbreak-associated strains. We used 
established hamster models infected with outbreak-associated C. difficile 
strains to determine whether oral administration of live or heat-inactivated S.b 
can prevent cecal tissue damage and inflammation. Hamsters infected with C. 
difficile strain VPI10463 (ribotype 087) and outbreak-associated strains 
ribotype 017, 027, and 078 developed severe cecal inflammation with mucosal 
damage, neutrophil infiltration, edema, increased NF-κB phosphorylation, and 
increased proinflammatory cytokine TNFα protein expression. Oral gavage of live, 
but not heated, S.b starting 5 days before C. difficile infection significantly 
reduced cecal tissue damage, NF-κB phosphorylation, and TNFα protein expression 
caused by infection with all strains. Moreover, S.b-conditioned medium reduced 
cell rounding caused by filtered supernatants from all C. difficile strains. 
S.b-conditioned medium also inhibited toxin A- and B-mediated actin cytoskeleton 
disruption. S.b is effective in preventing C. difficile infection by 
outbreak-associated via inhibition of the cytotoxic effects of C. difficile 
toxins.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00150.2016
PMCID: PMC5142203
PMID: 27514478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


650. Gastroenterology. 2010 Jul;139(1):259-69.e3. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.03.045. 
Epub 2010 Mar 27.

Hypoxia-inducible factor signaling provides protection in Clostridium 
difficile-induced intestinal injury.

Hirota SA(1), Fines K, Ng J, Traboulsi D, Lee J, Ihara E, Li Y, Willmore WG, 
Chung D, Scully MM, Louie T, Medlicott S, Lejeune M, Chadee K, Armstrong G, 
Colgan SP, Muruve DA, MacDonald JA, Beck PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Canada.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Clostridium difficile is the leading cause of nosocomial 
infectious diarrhea. Antibiotic resistance and increased virulence of strains 
have increased the number of C difficile-related deaths worldwide. The innate 
host response mechanisms to C difficile are not resolved; we propose that 
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF-1) has an innate, protective role in C difficile 
colitis. We studied the impact of C difficile toxins on the regulation of HIF-1 
and evaluated the role of HIF-1alpha in C difficile-mediated 
injury/inflammation.
METHODS: We assessed HIF-1alpha mRNA and protein levels and DNA binding in human 
mucosal biopsy samples and Caco-2 cells following exposure to C difficile 
toxins. We used the mouse ileal loop model of C difficile toxin-induced 
intestinal injury. Mice with targeted deletion of HIF-1alpha in the intestinal 
epithelium were used to assess the effects of HIF-1alpha signaling in response 
to C difficile toxin.
RESULTS: Mucosal biopsy specimens and Caco-2 cells exposed to C difficile toxin 
had a significant increase in HIF-1alpha transcription and protein levels. 
Toxin-induced DNA binding was also observed in Caco-2 cells. Toxin-induced 
HIF-1alpha accumulation was attenuated by nitric oxide synthase inhibitors. In 
vivo deletion of intestinal epithelial HIF-1alpha resulted in more severe, 
toxin-induced intestinal injury and inflammation. In contrast, stabilization of 
HIF-1alpha with dimethyloxallyl glycine attenuated toxin-induced injury and 
inflammation. This was associated with induction of HIF-1-regulated protective 
factors (such as vascular endothelial growth factor-alpha, CD73, and intestinal 
trefoil factor) and down-regulation of proinflammatory molecules such as tumor 
necrosis factor and Cxcl1.
CONCLUSIONS: HIF-1alpha protects the intestinal mucosa from C difficile toxins. 
The innate protective actions of HIF-1alpha in response to C difficile toxins be 
developed as therapeutics for C difficile-associated disease.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.03.045
PMCID: PMC3063899
PMID: 20347817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: no conflicts of interest exist


651. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 Apr;52(4):1391-5. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01045-07. 
Epub 2008 Feb 11.

Safety, tolerance, and pharmacokinetic studies of OPT-80 in healthy volunteers 
following single and multiple oral doses.

Shue YK(1), Sears PS, Shangle S, Walsh RB, Lee C, Gorbach SL, Okumu F, Preston 
RA.

Author information:
(1)Optimer Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 10110 Sorrento Valley Road, San Diego, CA 
92121, USA. ykshue@optimerpharma.com

Current therapies for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) are encumbered by 
treatment failures and recurrences. Due to its high in vitro activity against C. 
difficile but low activity against the typical intestinal flora, minimal 
absorption, and durable cure in the hamster model of C. difficile infection, 
OPT-80 was considered for clinical development as a therapy for CDI. This trial 
consisted of two phases. Four single oral doses of OPT-80 (100, 200, 300, and 
450 mg) were administered in a crossover manner to 16 healthy volunteers in a 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 1A study; a 1- to 2-week washout interval 
separated the treatments. In the double-blind phase 1B study, 24 healthy 
subjects were randomized to receive OPT-80 (150, 300, or 450 mg) or placebo for 
10 days. In both studies, OPT-80's safety and tolerability were evaluated and 
the concentrations of OPT-80 and its primary metabolite (OP-1118) in plasma and 
feces were determined. OPT-80 levels in the urine were also analyzed for the 
phase 1A study. In both the single-dose and the multiple-dose studies, OPT-80 
was well tolerated by all subjects in all dose groups. Maximal plasma 
concentrations were near or below the limit of quantification (5 ng/ml) across 
the dose range; urine concentrations were below the detection limit. The fecal 
total recovery of OPT-80 plus its major metabolite, OP-1118, approximated 100%. 
The tolerability, high fecal concentration, and low systemic exposure data from 
these studies support the further clinical development of OPT-80 as an oral 
therapy for CDI.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01045-07
PMCID: PMC2292557
PMID: 18268081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


652. Drugs Exp Clin Res. 1988;14(10):613-5.

In vitro activity of azithromycin (CP-62,993), a novel macrolide, against 
enteric pathogens.

Jones K(1), Felmingham D, Ridgway G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Microbiology, University College Hospital, London, UK.

Azithromycin (CP-62,993 [9-deoxy-9A-methyl-9A-aza-9A-homoerythromycin]) is a 
novel macrolide antimicrobial. In this study the in vitro activity of CP-62,993 
has been determined against selected enteropathogens, including Clostridium 
difficile, and compared with that of erythromycin. MICs were determined using an 
agar incorporation technique in Mueller-Hinton medium, containing saponin-lysed 
horse blood at a final concentration of 10% v/v, with an inoculum of 10(4) cfu. 
CP-62,993 was considerably more active than erythromycin against Salmonella 
typhi (MIC90 4 and greater than 32 mg/l, respectively), S. enteritidis (MIC90 4 
and greater than 32 mg/l), Shigella flexneri (MIC90 2 and 32 mg/l), Sh. 
dysenteriae (MIC90 2 and 32 mg/l), Sh. sonnei (MIC90 4 and 32 mg/l), 
Campylobacter jejuni (MIC90 0.12 and 1 mg/l), Vibrio cholerae (MIC90 0.25 and 8 
mg/l), V. parahaemolyticus (MIC90 0.5 and 8 mg/l), Yersinia enterocolitica 
(MIC90 4 and greater than 32 mg/l), Escherichia coli-ETEC (MIC90 4 and 32 mg/l), 
E. coli-EIEC (MIC90 4 and greater than 32 mg/l), Plesiomonas shigelloides (MIC90 
1 and 8 mg/l) and Aeromonas hydrophila (MIC90 4 and 32 mg/l). CP-62,993 (MIC90 2 
mg/l) was slightly less active than erythromycin (MIC90 1 mg/l) against isolates 
of C. difficile. The results suggest a potential clinical role for CP-62,993 in 
the treatment of enteric infections where antimicrobial therapy is indicated.

PMID: 2854515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


653. ISME J. 2021 Feb;15(2):577-591. doi: 10.1038/s41396-020-00798-6. Epub 2020 Oct 
21.

Mucin-derived O-glycans supplemented to diet mitigate diverse microbiota 
perturbations.

Pruss KM(#)(1), Marcobal A(#)(1), Southwick AM(1), Dahan D(1), Smits SA(1), 
Ferreyra JA(1), Higginbottom SK(1), Sonnenburg ED(1), Kashyap PC(2), Choudhury 
B(3), Bode L(4), Sonnenburg JL(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(3)GlycoAnalytics Core, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Neonatology and Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 
Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA. jsonnenburg@stanford.edu.
(6)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA. 
jsonnenburg@stanford.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Microbiota-accessible carbohydrates (MACs) are powerful modulators of microbiota 
composition and function. These substrates are often derived from diet, such as 
complex polysaccharides from plants or human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) during 
breastfeeding. Host-derived mucus glycans on gut-secreted mucin proteins serve 
as a continuous endogenous source of MACs for resident microbes; here we 
investigate the potential role of purified, orally administered mucus glycans in 
maintaining a healthy microbial community. In this study, we liberated and 
purified O-linked glycans from porcine gastric mucin and assessed their efficacy 
in shaping the recovery of a perturbed microbiota in a mouse model. We found 
that porcine mucin glycans (PMGs) and HMOs enrich for taxonomically similar 
resident microbes. We demonstrate that PMGs aid recovery of the microbiota after 
antibiotic treatment, suppress Clostridium difficile abundance, delay the onset 
of diet-induced obesity, and increase the relative abundance of resident 
Akkermansia muciniphila. In silico analysis revealed that genes associated with 
mucus utilization are abundant and diverse in prevalent gut commensals and rare 
in enteric pathogens, consistent with these glycan-degrading capabilities being 
selected for during host development and throughout the evolution of the 
host-microbe relationship. Importantly, we identify mucus glycans as a novel 
class of prebiotic compounds that can be used to mitigate perturbations to the 
microbiota and provide benefits to host physiology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41396-020-00798-6
PMID: 33087860


654. Eur J Immunol. 2020 Mar;50(3):326-337. doi: 10.1002/eji.201948322. Epub 2020 Feb 
6.

The microbiota and immune-mediated diseases: Opportunities for therapeutic 
intervention.

Fitzgibbon G(1), Mills KHG(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.

A multitude of diverse microorganisms, termed the microbiota, reside in the gut, 
respiratory tract, skin, and genital tract of humans and other animals. Recent 
advances in metagenomic sequencing and bioinformatics have enabled detailed 
characterization of these vital microbial communities. Studies in animal models 
have uncovered vital previously unrecognized roles for the microbiota in normal 
function of the immune responses, and when perturbed, in the pathogenesis of 
diseases of the gastrointestinal tract and lungs, but also at distant sites in 
the body including the brain. The composition of gut and respiratory microbiota 
can influence systemic inflammatory responses that mediate asthma, allergy, 
inflammatory bowel disease, obesity-related diseases, and neurodevelopmental or 
neurodegenerative conditions. Experiments in mouse models as well as emerging 
clinical studies have revealed that therapeutic manipulation of the microbiota, 
using fecal microbiota transplantation, probiotics, or engineered probiotics 
represent effective nontoxic approaches for the treatment or prevention of 
Clostridium difficile infection, allergy, and autoimmune diseases and may 
enhance the efficacy of certain cancer immunotherapeutics. This review discusses 
how commensal bacteria can influence immune responses that mediate a range of 
human diseases and how the microbiota are being targeted to treat these 
diseases, especially those resistant to pharmacological therapies.

© 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/eji.201948322
PMID: 31991477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


655. Elife. 2019 Jan 22;8:e40553. doi: 10.7554/eLife.40553.

Gut microbiota density influences host physiology and is shaped by host and 
microbial factors.

Contijoch EJ(1)(2), Britton GJ(1)(2), Yang C(1)(2), Mogno I(1), Li Z(1), Ng 
R(1), Llewellyn SR(1), Hira S(3), Johnson C(4), Rabinowitz KM(5)(6), Barkan 
R(5), Dotan I(5)(7), Hirten RP(8), Fu SC(2), Luo Y(8), Yang N(8), Luong T(2), 
Labrias PR(2), Lira S(1), Peter I(2), Grinspan A(8), Clemente JC(1), Kosoy R(2), 
Kim-Schulze S(9), Qin X(1), Castillo A(8), Hurley A(2), Atreja A(8), Rogers 
J(8), Fasihuddin F(8), Saliaj M(8), Nolan A(8), Reyes-Mercedes P(8), Rodriguez 
C(8), Aly S(8), Santa-Cruz K(8), Peters L(10)(11), Suárez-Fariñas M(2), Huang 
R(2), Hao K(2), Zhu J(2), Zhang B(2), Losic B(2), Irizar H(2), Song WM(2), Di 
Narzo A(2), Wang W(2), Cohen BL(8), DiMaio C(8), Greenwald D(8), Itzkowitz S(8), 
Lucas A(8), Marion J(8), Maser E(8), Ungaro R(8), Naymagon S(8), Novak J(8), 
Shah B(8), Ullman T(8), Rubin P(8), George J(8), Legnani P(8), Telesco SE(12), 
Friedman JR(12), Brodmerkel C(12), Plevy S(12), Cho JH(8), Colombel JF(8), 
Schadt EE(11), Argmann C(2), Dubinsky M(13), Kasarskis A(2), Sands B(8), Faith 
JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Precision Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, United States.
(2)Icahn Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, United States.
(3)Zoo Knoxville, Knoxville, United States.
(4)Center for Comparative Medicine and Surgery, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, United States.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel.
(6)Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(7)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(8)The Dr. Henry D Janowitz Division of Gastroenterology, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, United States.
(9)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, The Tisch Cancer Institute, 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, United States.
(10)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, United States.
(11)Sema4, Stamford, United States.
(12)Research and Development, Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Pennsylvania, United 
States.
(13)Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Pediatrics, Susan 
and Leonard Feinstein IBD Clinical Center, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, United States.

To identify factors that regulate gut microbiota density and the impact of 
varied microbiota density on health, we assayed this fundamental ecosystem 
property in fecal samples across mammals, human disease, and therapeutic 
interventions. Physiologic features of the host (carrying capacity) and the 
fitness of the gut microbiota shape microbiota density. Therapeutic manipulation 
of microbiota density in mice altered host metabolic and immune homeostasis. In 
humans, gut microbiota density was reduced in Crohn's disease, ulcerative 
colitis, and ileal pouch-anal anastomosis. The gut microbiota in recurrent 
Clostridium difficile infection had lower density and reduced fitness that were 
restored by fecal microbiota transplantation. Understanding the interplay 
between microbiota and disease in terms of microbiota density, host carrying 
capacity, and microbiota fitness provide new insights into microbiome structure 
and microbiome targeted therapeutics.
EDITORIAL NOTE: This article has been through an editorial process in which the 
authors decide how to respond to the issues raised during peer review. The 
Reviewing Editor's assessment is that all the issues have been addressed (see 
decision letter).

© 2019, Contijoch et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.40553
PMCID: PMC6342524
PMID: 30666957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EC, GB, CY, IM, ZL, RN, SL, SH, CJ, KR, RB, ID, 
RH, SF, YL, NY, TL, PL, SL, IP, AG, JC, RK, SK, XQ, AC, AH, AA, JR, FF, MS, AN, 
PR, CR, SA, KS, LP, MS, KH, JZ, BZ, BL, HI, WS, AD, WW, BC, CD, DG, SI, AL, JM, 
EM, RU, SN, JN, BS, TU, PR, JG, PL, ST, JF, CB, SP, JC, JC, ES, CA, AK, BS No 
competing interests declared, RH, MD, JF Is a consultant for Janssen and has no 
other financial competing interests to declare.


656. Curr Diab Rep. 2019 Jun 27;19(8):51. doi: 10.1007/s11892-019-1180-z.

Fecal Microbiota Transplantation: a Future Therapeutic Option for 
Obesity/Diabetes?

Aron-Wisnewsky J(1)(2)(3), Clément K(4)(5), Nieuwdorp M(6).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Nutrition and Obesities: Systemic Approaches 
(NutriOMics) Research Unit, Paris, France. judith.aron-wisnewsky@psl.aphp.fr.
(2)Assistante Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Nutrition Department, 
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, 75013, Paris, France. 
judith.aron-wisnewsky@psl.aphp.fr.
(3)Amsterdam UMC, Location AMC and VUMC, Department of Internal and Vascular 
Medicine, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
judith.aron-wisnewsky@psl.aphp.fr.
(4)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Nutrition and Obesities: Systemic Approaches 
(NutriOMics) Research Unit, Paris, France.
(5)Assistante Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Nutrition Department, 
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, 75013, Paris, France.
(6)Amsterdam UMC, Location AMC and VUMC, Department of Internal and Vascular 
Medicine, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The aim of this review is to summarize the current data 
available on the metabolic effects of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) 
including obesity and glucose metabolism in humans.
RECENT FINDINGS: Gut microbiota dysbiosis is a frequent characteristic observed 
in obesity and related metabolic diseases. Pieces of evidence mostly generated 
in mouse models suggest that rescuing this dysbiosis associates with improved 
metabolism. In humans, dietary or bariatric surgery interventions are often 
accompanied by complete or partial restoration of this dysbiosis together with 
weight reduction and metabolic amelioration. FMT is an interesting option to 
modify gut microbiota and has been associated with improved clinical outcomes, 
albeit only used in routine care for Clostridium difficile infection. However, 
there are only limited data on using FMT in the metabolic context. FMT from lean 
donors significantly improves insulin sensitivity in obese subjects with 
metabolic syndrome. However, there is a wide range of clinical responses. 
Interestingly in subjects with high microbial gene richness at baseline and when 
FMT donors that are metabolically compromised are used, no metabolic improvement 
is seen. Moreover, more studies evaluating the effect of FMT in patients with 
overt type 2 diabetes are warranted. Furthermore, interventions (in the receiver 
prior to FMT) aiming to enhance FMT response also need evaluation.

DOI: 10.1007/s11892-019-1180-z
PMID: 31250122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


657. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2020 Dec;56(6):106188. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.106188. Epub 2020 Oct 9.

Repurposing the Veterinary Antiprotozoal Drug Ronidazole for the Treatment of 
Clostridioides difficile Infection.

AbdelKhalek A(1), Seleem MN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
(2)Department of Comparative Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA; Department of Biomedical 
Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA, 24061, USA. 
Electronic address: seleem@vt.edu.

Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is a principal cause of 
hospital-acquired infections and fatalities worldwide. The need for new, more 
potent anticlostridial agents is far from being met. Drug repurposing can be 
utilized as a rapid and cost-efficient method of drug development. The current 
study was conducted to evaluate the activity of ronidazole, a veterinary 
antiprotozoal drug, as a potential treatment for CDI. Ronidazole inhibited the 
growth of clinical C. difficile isolates (including NAP1 and toxigenic strains) 
at a very low concentration (0.125 µg/mL) and showed superior killing kinetics 
compared with metronidazole, an anticlostridial agent from the same chemical 
category. In addition, ronidazole did not inhibit growth of several commensal 
organisms naturally present in the human intestine that play a protective role 
in preventing CDIs. Furthermore, ronidazole was found to be non-toxic to human 
gut cells and permeated a monolayer of colonic epithelial cells (Caco-2) at a 
slower rate than metronidazole. Finally, ronidazole outperformed metronidazole 
when both were tested at a dose of 1 mg/kg daily in a mouse model of CDI. 
Overall, ronidazole merits further investigation as a potential treatment for 
CDIs.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2020.106188
PMCID: PMC7704610
PMID: 33045352

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare no 
competing financial interests.


658. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Dec 13;113(50):14384-14389. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1613156113. Epub 2016 Nov 22.

Familial Mediterranean fever mutations lift the obligatory requirement for 
microtubules in Pyrin inflammasome activation.

Van Gorp H(1)(2), Saavedra PH(1)(2), de Vasconcelos NM(1)(2), Van Opdenbosch 
N(1)(2), Vande Walle L(1)(2), Matusiak M(1)(2), Prencipe G(3), Insalaco A(3), 
Van Hauwermeiren F(1)(2), Demon D(1)(2), Bogaert DJ(4)(5)(6), Dullaers M(4)(7), 
De Baere E(8), Hochepied T(1)(9), Dehoorne J(10), Vermaelen KY(2)(11), Haerynck 
F(4)(5)(6), De Benedetti F(3), Lamkanfi M(12)(2).

Author information:
(1)Inflammation Research Center, VIB, Zwijnaarde, B-9052, Belgium.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9000, Belgium.
(3)Rheumatology Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, I-00146, Italy.
(4)Clinical Immunology Research Laboratory, Centre for Primary Immunodeficiency 
Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, B-9000, Belgium.
(5)Department of Pediatric Immunology and Pulmonology, Centre for Primary 
Immunodeficiency Ghent, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, B-9000, Belgium.
(6)Jeffrey Modell Diagnosis and Research Centre, Ghent University Hospital, 
Ghent, B-9000, Belgium.
(7)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, Inflammation Research Center, VIB, 
Zwijnaarde, B-9052, Belgium.
(8)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9000, Belgium.
(9)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, B-9000, 
Belgium.
(10)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
B-9000, Belgium.
(11)Tumor Immunology Laboratory, Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Ghent 
University Hospital, Ghent, B-9000, Belgium.
(12)Inflammation Research Center, VIB, Zwijnaarde, B-9052, Belgium; 
mohamed.lamkanfi@irc.vib-ugent.be.

Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common monogenic autoinflammatory 
disease worldwide. It is caused by mutations in the inflammasome adaptor Pyrin, 
but how FMF mutations alter signaling in FMF patients is unknown. Herein, we 
establish Clostridium difficile and its enterotoxin A (TcdA) as Pyrin-activating 
agents and show that wild-type and FMF Pyrin are differentially controlled by 
microtubules. Diverse microtubule assembly inhibitors prevented Pyrin-mediated 
caspase-1 activation and secretion of IL-1β and IL-18 from mouse macrophages and 
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Remarkably, Pyrin inflammasome 
activation persisted upon microtubule disassembly in PBMCs of FMF patients but 
not in cells of patients afflicted with other autoinflammatory diseases. We 
further demonstrate that microtubules control Pyrin activation downstream of 
Pyrin dephosphorylation and that FMF mutations enable microtubule-independent 
assembly of apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a caspase 
recruitment domain (ASC) micrometer-sized perinuclear structures (specks). The 
discovery that Pyrin mutations remove the obligatory requirement for 
microtubules in inflammasome activation provides a conceptual framework for 
understanding FMF and enables immunological screening of FMF mutations.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1613156113
PMCID: PMC5167202
PMID: 27911804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.V.G., P.H.V.S., and M.L. are listed as 
inventor on a patent application on immunological FMF diagnosis.


659. J Bacteriol. 2013 Mar;195(5):965-76. doi: 10.1128/JB.01740-12. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

PanG, a new ketopantoate reductase involved in pantothenate synthesis.

Miller CN(1), LoVullo ED, Kijek TM, Fuller JR, Brunton JC, Steele SP, Taft-Benz 
SA, Richardson AR, Kawula TH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Pantothenate, commonly referred to as vitamin B(5), is an essential molecule in 
the metabolism of living organisms and forms the core of coenzyme A. Unlike 
humans, some bacteria and plants are capable of de novo biosynthesis of 
pantothenate, making this pathway a potential target for drug development. 
Francisella tularensis subsp. tularensis Schu S4 is a zoonotic bacterial 
pathogen that is able to synthesize pantothenate but is lacking the known 
ketopantoate reductase (KPR) genes, panE and ilvC, found in the canonical 
Escherichia coli pathway. Described herein is a gene encoding a novel KPR, for 
which we propose the name panG (FTT1388), which is conserved in all sequenced 
Francisella species and is the sole KPR in Schu S4. Homologs of this KPR are 
present in other pathogenic bacteria such as Enterococcus faecalis, Coxiella 
burnetii, and Clostridium difficile. Both the homologous gene from E. faecalis 
V583 (EF1861) and E. coli panE functionally complemented Francisella novicida 
lacking any KPR. Furthermore, panG from F. novicida can complement an E. coli 
KPR double mutant. A Schu S4 ΔpanG strain is a pantothenate auxotroph and was 
genetically and chemically complemented with panG in trans or with the addition 
of pantolactone. There was no virulence defect in the Schu S4 ΔpanG strain 
compared to the wild type in a mouse model of pneumonic tularemia. In summary, 
we characterized the pantothenate pathway in Francisella novicida and F. 
tularensis and identified an unknown and previously uncharacterized KPR that can 
convert 2-dehydropantoate to pantoate, PanG.

DOI: 10.1128/JB.01740-12
PMCID: PMC3571331
PMID: 23243306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


660. Microorganisms. 2019 Jul 26;7(8):218. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms7080218.

Developing Gut Microbiota Exerts Colonisation Resistance to Clostridium (syn. 
Clostridioides) difficile in Piglets.

Grześkowiak Ł(1), Dadi TH(2), Zentek J(2), Vahjen W(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Freie Universität Berlin, Königin-Luise 
Strasse 49, 14195 Berlin, Germany. lukasz.grzeskowiak@fu-berlin.de.
(2)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Freie Universität Berlin, Königin-Luise 
Strasse 49, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Clostridium (syn. Clostridioides) difficile is considered a pioneer colonizer 
and may cause gut infection in neonatal piglets. The aim of this study was to 
explore the microbiota-C. difficile associations in pigs. We used the DNA from 
the faeces of four sows collected during the periparturient period and from two 
to three of their piglets (collected weekly until nine weeks of age) for the 
determination of bacterial community composition (sequencing) and C. difficile 
concentration (qPCR). Furthermore, C. difficile-negative faeces were enriched in 
a growth medium, followed by qPCR to verify the presence of this bacterium. 
Clostridium-sensu-stricto-1 and Lactobacillus spp. predominated the gut 
microbiota of the sows and their offspring. C. difficile was detected at least 
once in the faeces of all sows during the entire sampling period, albeit at low 
concentrations. Suckling piglets harboured C. difficile in high concentrations 
(up to log10 9.29 copy number/g faeces), which gradually decreased as the 
piglets aged. Enrichment revealed the presence of C. difficile in previously C. 
difficile-negative sow and offspring faeces. In suckling piglets, the C. 
difficile level was negatively correlated with carbohydrate-fermenting bacteria, 
and it was positively associated with potential pathogens. Shannon and richness 
diversity indices were negatively associated with the C. difficile counts in 
suckling piglets. This study showed that gut microbiota seems to set conditions 
for colonisation resistance against C. difficile in the offspring. However, this 
conclusion requires further research to include host-specific factors.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms7080218
PMCID: PMC6723027
PMID: 31357520

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


661. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2002 Jul;22(7):869-77. doi: 
10.1097/00004647-200207000-00012.

Impairment of autoregulatory vasodilation by NAD(P)H oxidase-dependent 
superoxide generation during acute stage of subarachnoid hemorrhage in rat pial 
artery.

Shin HK(1), Lee JH, Kim KY, Kim CD, Lee WS, Rhim BY, Hong KW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Research Institute of 
Genetic Engineering, Pusan National University, Korea.

This study assessed the mechanism(s) by which the autoregulatory vasodilation of 
rat pial artery in response to acute hypotension during the acute phase of 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) was markedly blunted. Increased superoxide 
production from the cerebral vessels in response to NAD(P)H at 24 hours after 
SAH + NG-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester (l-NAME) (10 mg/kg) was inhibited by 
intracisternal administration of a tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein (10 
micromol/L) and Rac inhibitor Clostridium difficile toxin B (1 ng/mL) and a 
flavoenzyme inhibitor diphenyleneiodonium (10 micromol/L). The expression of 
gp91phox was enhanced by SAH + l-NAME from 12 to 24 hours, which was inhibited 
by genistein and toxin B, but not the p22phox. Increased membrane translocation 
of Rac after SAH + l-NAME was attenuated by both genistein and toxin B, whereas 
increased tyrosine kinase activity was blocked by genistein, but not by toxin B. 
The blunted autoregulatory vasodilation to acute hypotension was effectively 
recovered by genistein and C. difficile toxin B as well as by 
diphenyleneiodonium. In conclusion, SAH during acute stage causes an increase in 
NAD(P)H oxidase-dependent superoxide formation in cerebral vessels, which is due 
to activation of tyrosine phosphorylation-dependent increased expression of 
gp91phox mRNA and translocation of Rac protein, thereby resulting in a 
significant reduction of autoregulatory vasodilation.

DOI: 10.1097/00004647-200207000-00012
PMID: 12142572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


662. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2008 Jan;376(5):363-73. doi: 
10.1007/s00210-007-0214-2. Epub 2007 Nov 29.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate and endothelin-1 induce the expression of rgs16 protein 
in cardiac myocytes by transcriptional activation of the rgs16 gene.

Stuebe S(1), Wieland T, Kraemer E, Stritzky Av, Schroeder D, Seekamp S, Vogt A, 
Chen CK, Patten M.

Author information:
(1)Universitäres Herzzentrum, Kardiologie, Universitätsklinikum 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistr. 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

The expression of the negative Regulator of G protein signaling 16 (RGS16) is 
rapidly induced in cardiomyocytes by various stimuli. To identify the promoter 
of the mouse RGS16 gene, a 1.8-kb deoxyribonucleic acid fragment 5' of the 
RGS16-coding region was subcloned into a firefly-luciferase reporter vector and 
four overlapping fragments were analyzed. The luciferase production was 
quantified in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes (NRCM). A 0.6-kb fragment that 
induced a tenfold increase in luciferase activity contained the minimal promoter 
sequence. Its activity was twofold stimulated by fetal calf serum, endothelin-1 
(ET-1), and sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), which stimuli also elevated the level 
of RGS16 protein. Stimulation of NRCM with ET-1 induced activation of the 
monomeric GTPases RhoA and Rac1, whereas S1P and the selective S1P1 receptor 
agonist SEW2871 only induced a pronounced activation of Rac1. In accordance, the 
treatment with the Rho-, Rac-, and Cdc42-inactivating Clostridium difficile 
Toxin B (TcdB) 10463 inhibited ET-1 and S1P-induced transcriptional activation. 
The ET-1-induced activation was insensitive to pertussis toxin but selectively 
suppressed by the RhoA-C-specific C2I-C3 ADP-ribosyl transferase and the ET(B) 
receptor antagonist BQ788. The S1P-induced activation was specifically inhibited 
by pertussis toxin and the Rac-inactivating TcdB 1470. All stimulated 
transcriptional activity was abolished by the negative transcription factor Yin 
Yang 1 (YY1), which binds to a consensus sequence within the minimal promoter. 
Taken together, our data show that most likely ET(B)- and S1P1-receptors induce 
RGS16 protein expression in cardiac myocytes by increasing the transcriptional 
activity of the rgs16 gene. This activation is mediated by heterotrimeric G 
proteins, Rho GTPases, and is under negative control of the transcription factor 
YY1.

DOI: 10.1007/s00210-007-0214-2
PMID: 18046543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


663. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Apr 21;55(4):2631-41. doi: 
10.1167/iovs.13-13162.

Rho GTPases control ciliary epithelium cells proliferation and progenitor 
profile induction in vivo.

Del Debbio CB(1), Santos MF, Yan CY, Ahmad I, Hamassaki DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

PURPOSE: Rho GTPases play a central role in actin-based cytoskeleton 
reorganization and regulate multiple signaling pathways that control gene 
transcription, cell survival, and proliferation. We investigated the effect of 
Rho GTPases on cell cycle regulation and progenitor genes expression on mouse 
ciliary epithelium (CE), a potential source of progenitor/stem cells in the 
adult retina.
METHODS: Rho GTPases were activated by intraocular injection of lysophosphatidic 
acid and inactivated by Clostridium difficile Toxin A (general Rho GTPase 
inhibitor), NSC23766 (Rac1 activation inhibitor), or Y27632 (Rho-associated 
protein kinase [ROCK] inhibitor). Thereafter, we assayed for RhoA, RhoB, and 
Rac1 protein localization in CE cells. Proliferation was examined by the 
expression levels of cell cycle regulators p27(kip), p16(INK4a), and Ki67 and 
the effects on progenitors by determining the changes in Pax6 and Chx10 
progenitor markers expression.
RESULTS: All GTPases investigated were expressed in mouse CE cells. Activation 
increased the coexpression of Pax6 and Chx10, but had no significant effect on 
the proliferation of CE cells. In contrast, Rho GTPases inactivation increased 
cell proliferation and potentiated the proliferative effect of growth factors. 
Specific inactivation of Rac1 or ROCK increased the levels of Ki67 and decreased 
the expression of the cell cycle inhibitors p27(kip) and p16(INK4a).
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports that Rho GTPase modulation (activation and 
inactivation) controls the expression of retinal progenitor genes and 
proliferation, respectively, in the adult ciliary epithelial progenitor/stem 
cells of rodent eyes. The modulation of these two different mechanisms 
(proliferation and reprogramming) may provide a potential new approach in 
retinal repair.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.13-13162
PMID: 24692128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


664. Dig Dis Sci. 2016 Aug;61(8):2262-2271. doi: 10.1007/s10620-016-4060-2. Epub 2016 
Feb 5.

Beneficial Effects of Fecal Microbiota Transplantation on Ulcerative Colitis in 
Mice.

Tian Z(1), Liu J(1), Liao M(1), Li W(1), Zou J(1), Han X(1), Kuang M(1), Shen 
W(2), Li H(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China.
(2)Department of Chemical Biology, School of Pharmacy, Tianjin Medical 
University, Tianjin, 300070, China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical 
Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, 300070, China. yxswhx@qq.com.

Comment in
    Dig Dis Sci. 2016 Aug;61(8):2154-5.

BACKGROUND: Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic condition and the most common 
form of inflammatory bowel disease. The goal of standard treatment is mainly to 
induce and maintain remission with anti-inflammatory, immunosuppressive agents, 
and/or colectomy. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has been used 
successfully to treat relapsing or refractory Clostridium difficile infection. 
The alteration of microbiota in mouse models of UC as well as in patients 
suggested the possibility of treating UC with FMT.
AIMS: To study the effects of FMT on dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced UC 
model in mice.
METHODS: Littermates of BALB/c and C57BL/6J were randomized into four groups: 
normal control , treatment with DSS for 7 days (DSS - FMT), treatment with DSS 
followed by FMT for another 8 days (DSS + FMT), and treatment with DSS and FMT 
followed by another 5 days for recovery (remission). Body weight, survival rate, 
and DAI scores of mice in each group were recorded. Changes in distal colon were 
studied by histopathology. Alterations of spleen and lamina propria regulatory 
lymphocytes, major bacterial species in feces and inflammatory cytokines in 
colon were also studied.
RESULTS: C57BL/6J mice experienced more significant weight loss than BALB/c mice 
after DSS treatment, regardless of whether the two strains of mice were 
co-housed or not. FMT caused reversal of DAI scores in BALB/c but not in 
C57BL/6J mice. In BALB/c mice, FMT also reduced colon inflammation that was 
paralleled by decreased inflammatory cytokine levels, altered bacterial 
microbiota, and regulatory lymphocyte proportions.
CONCLUSIONS: FMT is effective in a mouse model of UC through its modulation on 
gut microbiota and the host immune system.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-016-4060-2
PMID: 26846120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


665. Mol Cell Biochem. 2006 Jan;281(1-2):17-25. doi: 10.1007/s11010-006-0165-9.

Role of Cdc42 in neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells and cerebellar granule neurons.

Ahmed I(1), Calle Y, Iwashita S, Nur-E-Kamal A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, University of 
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Inactivation of Rho GTPases inhibited the neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells. The 
role of Cdc42 in neurite outgrowth was then studied by selective inhibition of 
Cdc42 signals. Overexpression of ACK42, Cdc42 binding domain of ACK-1, inhibited 
NGF-induced neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells. ACK42 also inhibited the neurite 
outgrowth of PC12 cells induced by constitutively activated mutant of Cdc42, but 
not Rac. These results suggest that Cdc42 plays an important role in mediating 
NGF-induced neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells. Inhibition of neurite outgrowth was 
also demonstrated using a cell permeable chimeric protein, penetratin-ACK42. A 
dominant negative mutant of Rac, RacN17 inhibited Cdc42-induced neurite 
outgrowth of PC12 cells suggesting that Rac acts downstream of Cdc42. Further 
studies, using primary-cultures of rat cerebellar granule neurons, showed that 
Cdc42 is also involved in the neurite outgrowth of cerebellar granule neurons. 
Both penetratin-ACK42 and Clostridium difficile toxin B, which inactivates all 
members of Rho GTPases strongly inhibited the neurite outgrowth of cerebellar 
granule neurons. These results show that Cdc42 plays a similar and essential 
role in the development of neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells and cerebellar 
granule neurons. These results provide evidence that Cdc42 produces signals that 
are essential for the neurite outgrowth of PC12 cells and cerebellar granule 
neurons.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-006-0165-9
PMID: 16328953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


666. Carcinogenesis. 2002 Mar;23(3):521-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/23.3.521.

Mechanism of lovastatin-induced apoptosis in intestinal epithelial cells.

Agarwal B(1), Halmos B, Feoktistov AS, Protiva P, Ramey WG, Chen M, Pothoulakis 
C, Lamont JT, Holt PR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Surgery, St Luke's-Roosevelt 
Hospital Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10025, USA.

We earlier showed that lovastatin potentiated the chemopreventive effects of 
sulindac against colon neoplasia in a rodent model and augments apoptosis 
induced by 5-FU and cisplatin in human colon cancer cells. In the present study, 
we investigated effects of lovastatin in spontaneously immortalized rat 
intestinal epithelial cells, IEC-18 and their K-ras transformed clones. 
Lovastatin induced morphologic changes (cell rounding and detachment) and 
apoptosis that were not influenced by K-ras mutations, but were prevented by 
geranylgeranyl-pyrophosphate or by mevalonate. Clostridium difficile toxin B, 
which directly inactivates rho, induced similar morphologic changes and 
apoptosis. Cycloheximide prevented these effects of lovastatin, but not C. 
difficile toxin B. Lovastatin decreased the amounts of membrane bound rhoA and 
rhoB. Cycloheximide and geranylgeranyl-pyrophosphate prevented lovastatin 
induced morphologic changes and apoptosis but did not inhibit lovastatin-induced 
changes in membrane translocation of rho. Our data suggest that lovastatin 
induces morphologic changes and apoptosis by inhibiting geranylgeranylation of 
small GTPases of the rho family and thereby inactivating them. Restoration of 
membrane translocation of rho is not necessary for preventing lovastatin-induced 
morphologic changes or apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1093/carcin/23.3.521
PMID: 11895868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


667. FEBS Lett. 1998 Dec 4;440(3):287-90. doi: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01479-3.

Regulation of phospholipase D activity in synaptosomes permeabilized with 
Staphylococcus aureus alpha-toxin.

Sarri E(1), Böckmann I, Kempter U, Valeva A, von Eichel-Streiber C, Weichel O, 
Klein J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Mainz, Germany.

In order to investigate the regulation of presynaptic phospholipase D (PLD) 
activity by calcium and G proteins, we established a permeabilization procedure 
for rat cortical synaptosomes using Staphylococcus aureus alpha-toxin (30-100 
microg/ml). In permeabilized synaptosomes, PLD activity was significantly 
stimulated when the concentration of free calcium was increased from 0.1 microM 
to 1 microM. This activation was inhibited in the presence of KN-62 (1 microM), 
an inhibitor of calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II (CaMKII), but not by the 
protein kinase C inhibitor, Ro 31-8220 (1-10 microM). Synaptosomal PLD activity 
was also stimulated in the presence of 1 microM GTPgammaS. When Rho proteins 
were inhibited by pretreatment of the synaptosomes with Clostridium difficile 
toxin B (TcdB; 1-10 ng/ml), the effect of GTPgammaS was significantly reduced; 
in contrast, brefeldin A (10-100 microM), an inhibitor of ARF activation, was 
ineffective. Calcium stimulation of PLD was inhibited by TcdB, but 
GTPgammaS-dependent activation was insensitive to KN-62. We conclude that 
synaptosomal PLD is activated in a pathway which sequentially involves CaMKII 
and Rho proteins.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-5793(98)01479-3
PMID: 9872388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


668. Mol Microbiol. 2000 Jan;35(2):275-88. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01690.x.

Identification of a novel genetic locus that is required for in vitro adhesion 
of a clinical isolate of enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli to epithelial 
cells.

Nicholls L(1), Grant TH, Robins-Browne RM.

Author information:
(1)Microbiological Research Unit, Department of Microbiology and Infectious 
Diseases, Royal Children's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria 3052, Australia.

Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) are food-borne intestinal pathogens 
with a low infectious dose. Adhesion of some EHEC strains to epithelial cells is 
attributed, in part, to intimin, but other factors may be required for the 
intestinal colonizing ability of these bacteria. In order to identify additional 
adherence factors of EHEC, we generated transposon mutants of a clinical EHEC 
isolate of serotype O111:H-, which displayed high levels of adherence to 
cultured Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. One mutant was markedly deficient in 
CHO cell adherence, human red blood cell agglutination and autoaggregation. 
Sequence analysis of the gene disrupted in this mutant revealed a 9669 bp novel 
chromosomal open reading frame (ORF), which was designated efa1, for EHEC factor 
for adherence. efa1 displayed 28% amino acid identity with the predicted product 
of a recently described ORF from the haemolysin-encoding plasmid of EHEC 
O157:H7. The amino termini of the putative products of these two genes exhibit 
up to 38% amino acid similarity to Clostridium difficile toxins A and B. efa1 
occurred within a novel genetic locus, at least 15 kb in length, which featured 
a low G+C content, several insertion sequence homologues and a homologue of the 
Shigella flexneri enterotoxin ShET2. DNA probes prepared from different regions 
of efa1 hybridized with all of 116 strains of attaching-effacing E. coli (AEEC) 
of a variety of serotypes, including enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and EHEC, 
but with none of 91 non-AEEC strains. Nevertheless, efa1 was not required for 
the attachment-effacement phenotype, and the efa1 locus was not physically 
linked to the locus for enterocyte effacement (LEE) pathogenicity island, which 
is responsible for this phenotype in EPEC. These findings suggest that efa1 
encodes a novel virulence-associated determinant of AEEC, which contributes to 
the adhesive capacity of these bacteria.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.01690.x
PMID: 10652089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


669. Equine Vet J. 2014 May;46(3):311-6. doi: 10.1111/evj.12119. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Infectious agents associated with diarrhoea in neonatal foals in central 
Kentucky: a comprehensive molecular study.

Slovis NM(1), Elam J, Estrada M, Leutenegger CM.

Author information:
(1)Hagyard Equine Medical Institute, Kentucky, USA.

REASONS FOR PERFORMING STUDY: Diarrhoea caused by infectious agents is common in 
foals but there is no comprehensive molecular work-up of the relative prevalence 
of common agents and appearance of coinfections.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of 9 infectious agents in 
gastrointestinal (GI)-diseased and healthy foals with ages ranging from 1 to 20 
weeks of age and to what degree coinfections are associated with clinical signs 
of GI disease.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective controlled observational study.
METHODS: The population consisted of 88 Thoroughbred foals aged 2 days to 17 
weeks born on 32 different studfarms in Kentucky. Healthy (n = 37) and 
GI-diseased (n = 51) foals were identified based on clinical presentation. 
Faecal samples were analysed for 9 infectious agents by real-time PCR: equine 
rotavirus, equine coronavirus, Clostridium difficile toxins A & B, Neorickettsia 
risticii, Clostridium perfringens alpha toxin, Lawsonia intracellularis, 
Rhodococcus equi, Cryptosporidium spp., and Salmonella spp. Salmonella was also 
cultured from overnight selenite enrichment broth.
RESULTS: The prevalence of infectious pathogens under study was between 0% 
(Lawsonia intracellularis) and 34.6% (equine rotavirus). The overall prevalence 
for any infectious agent was 63.2% in the GI-diseased group and 43.2% in the 
healthy group. Coinfections were significantly more frequent in the sick group 
(15 monoinfections vs. 22 coinfections) than in the healthy group (12 vs. 4, 
respectively, P = 0.0002). Six of the 8 infectious agents were associated with 
the GI-diseased group, the other 2 were not (equine coronavirus and R. equi).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of panels rather than individual tests in combination with 
quantitative toxin gene analysis enables detection of coinfections significantly 
associated with risk of disease. Several infectious diseases previously not 
tested for or considered unimportant were found at high prevalence and require 
further investigation.

© 2013 EVJ Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/evj.12119
PMCID: PMC7163618
PMID: 23773143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


670. J AOAC Int. 2011 Jan-Feb;94(1):259-72.

In vitro production of Clostridium difficile spores for use in the efficacy 
evaluation of disinfectants: a precollaborative investigation.

Hasan JA(1), Japal KM, Christensen ER, Samalot-Freire LC.

Author information:
(1)U.S. Environmental Protection Agency-Office of Pesticide Programs 
Microbiology Laboratory, Environmental Science Center, Fort Meade, MD 
20755-5350, USA. hasan.jafrul@epa.gov

Clostridium difficile is a strict anaerobic spore-forming bacterium, and an 
increasingly common nosocomial pathogen. The U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) is responsible for the registration of disinfectants, including 
products designed to treat environmental surfaces contaminated with spores of C. 
difficile. Product efficacy data are required for registration; however, there 
is a lack of methodology for generating high-quality spore suspensions for 
evaluating product performance. As such, a study was carried out to select a 
suitable C. difficile strain and to develop a stand-alone method to prepare a 
spore suspension that meets specific criteria necessary for quantitative testing 
of disinfectants. The criteria are: (1) a spore titer of > 8 log10/mL, (2) > or 
= 90% spores to vegetative cells, and (3) resistance of spores (determined by 
viability) to 2.5 M hydrochloric acid (HCl). Several strains of C. difficile 
(toxigenic and nontoxigenic) were grown on various media (solid and liquid) for 
varying lengths of time to determine the best combination of incubation 
conditions and media to optimize spore production and quality. Once the spore 
production procedure was optimized, a toxigenic strain of C. difficile [American 
Type Culture Collection (ATCC) 43598] was selected for use in trials to verify 
repeatability from one production run to the next. The spore suspension was 
initiated by spreading vegetative cells of C. difficile (ATCC 43598) on CDC 
anaerobic 5% sheep blood agar plates and incubating for 7-10 days at 36 +/- 1 
degrees C under anaerobic conditions. Spores were harvested when > or = 90% of 
the cells converted to spores as determined by observation using phase-contrast 
microscopy. The spores were washed three times with saline-Tween-80, resuspended 
in cold deionized water, heated to 70 degrees C for 10 min, evaluated 
microscopically for quality, and enumerated on cycloserine-cefoxitin-fructose 
agar containing horse blood and taurocholate. The spore suspension was used to 
inoculate brushed stainless steel carriers (1 cm in diameter) with and without a 
soil load in accordance with the Standard Quantitative Carrier Disk Test Method 
(ASTM E-2197-02) to determine carrier load. Once it was determined that > 6 
log10 spores/carrier could be recovered, spores were evaluated for resistance to 
HCI. The sporulation method presented in this report is simple and repeatable 
and results in spore suspension of high titer (> 8 log10/mL) and quality (> or = 
90% spores to vegetative cells) that met acid resistance criteria (spores were 
resistant to 2.5 M HCI for 10 min). In addition, recovery from brushed stainless 
steel carriers with and without soil load was > 6 log10 spores/carrier. A 6 
log10 performance standard was set forth in the EPA's interim guidance for 
generating data to support a label claim for effectiveness against C. difficile 
spores on hard, nonporous surfaces. This precollaborative investigation 
successfully demonstrated the use of a methodology for in vitro production of C. 
difficile spores (ATCC 43598) necessary for conducting efficacy tests. A 
proposal will be submitted to the AOAC INTERNATIONAL Methods Committee on 
Antimicrobial Efficacy Testing for a collaborative study; see Appendix.

PMID: 21391503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


671. Infect Immun. 2013 Jan;81(1):166-72. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00572-12. Epub 2012 Oct 
31.

Increased susceptibility of melanin-concentrating hormone-deficient mice to 
infection with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium.

Karagiannis AK(1), Ziogas DC, Gras-Miralles B, Geiger BM, Nagel J, Trebicka E, 
Najarian R, Cherayil BJ, Kokkotou E.

Author information:
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.

Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) was initially identified in mammals as a 
hypothalamic neuropeptide regulating appetite and energy balance. However, the 
wide distribution of MCH receptors in peripheral tissues suggests additional 
functions for MCH which remain largely unknown. We have previously reported that 
mice lacking MCH develop attenuated intestinal inflammation when exposed to 
Clostridium difficile toxin A. To further characterize the role of MCH in host 
defense mechanisms against intestinal pathogens, Salmonella enterocolitis (using 
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium) was induced in MCH-deficient mice and 
their wild-type littermates. In the absence of MCH, infected mice had increased 
mortality associated with higher bacterial loads in blood, liver, and spleen. 
Moreover, the knockout mice developed more-severe intestinal inflammation, based 
on epithelial damage, immune cell infiltrates, and local and systemic cytokine 
levels. Paradoxically, these enhanced inflammatory responses in the MCH knockout 
mice were associated with disproportionally lower levels of macrophages 
infiltrating the intestine. Hence, we investigated potential direct effects of 
MCH on monocyte/macrophage functions critical for defense against intestinal 
pathogens. Using RAW 264.7 mouse monocytic cells, which express endogenous MCH 
receptor, we found that treatment with MCH enhanced the phagocytic capacity of 
these cells. Taken together, these findings reveal a previously unappreciated 
role for MCH in host-bacterial interactions.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00572-12
PMCID: PMC3536128
PMID: 23115043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


672. Ann Microbiol (Paris). 1984 Mar-Apr;135A(2):303-18.

[Effect of the ingestion of wheat bran on the fecal microbial flora of human 
donors and of recipient gnotoxenic mice, and on the barrier effects exerted by 
these flora against various potentially pathogenic microorganisms].

[Article in French]

Ducluzeau R, Ladiré M, Raibaud P.

The effect of bran ingestion on the flora of the human digestive tract was 
studied using two methods: quantitative enumeration of various microbial 
populations of the faecal flora, and a demonstration of the antagonistic effect 
exerted by the faecal flora against various potentially pathogenic bacteria of 
the environment. Since this latter study cannot be effected in human subjects, 
we used a model constituted by axenic mice inoculated with patients' flora. 
Faecal samples from 3 human donors receiving bran-containing diets were obtained 
prior to treatment and 30 days thereafter. These faecal samples were inoculated 
into axenic mice fed a diet with or without bran. The dominant floras of the 
human donors, before and after bran ingestion, were highly similar. The faecal 
floras of the gnotoxenic mice resembled those of the donors and no change 
resulting from the presence of bran in the diet could be observed. The drastic 
or permissive barrier effects exerted in the gnotoxenic mice by the human donors 
against Clostridium perfringens, Staphylococcus aureus, Candida albicans and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa were not modified by the presence of bran in the diet. 
The large variability between animals in the barrier effect against Clostridium 
difficile masked any possible role of the bran. Study of the transit of Bacillus 
spores in the digestive tract of various mouse groups showed the existence of 
differences according to the origin of the inoculated floras, but not according 
to the presence or absence of bran in the diet.

PMID: 6326642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


673. Sci Rep. 2018 Apr 18;8(1):6219. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-24342-x.

Fecal microbiota transplantation reverses antibiotic and chemotherapy-induced 
gut dysbiosis in mice.

Le Bastard Q(1), Ward T(2), Sidiropoulos D(2), Hillmann BM(3), Chun CL(2)(4), 
Sadowsky MJ(2)(5), Knights D(6)(7), Montassier E(8).

Author information:
(1)Université de Nantes, Microbiotas Hosts Antibiotics and bacterial Resistances 
(MiHAR), Nantes, 44000, France.
(2)Biotechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota, 
55108, USA.
(3)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455, USA.
(4)Department of Civil Engineering and National Resources Research Institute, 
University of Minnesota Duluth, Duluth, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Department of Soil Water & Climate, and Department of Plant and Microbial 
Biology, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota, 55108, USA.
(6)Biotechnology Institute, University of Minnesota, Saint Paul, Minnesota, 
55108, USA. dknights@umn.edu.
(7)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 55455, USA. dknights@umn.edu.
(8)Université de Nantes, Microbiotas Hosts Antibiotics and bacterial Resistances 
(MiHAR), Nantes, 44000, France. emmanuel.montassier@chu-nantes.fr.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is now widely used to treat recurrent 
Clostridium difficile infection, but has been less studied as a means to restore 
microbiome diversity and composition following antibiotic or chemotherapy 
treatments. The purpose of our study was to assess the efficacy of FMT to 
reverse antibiotic- and chemotherapy-induced gut dysbiosis in a mouse model. 
C57BL/6J mice were treated with ampicillin for 1 week and/or received a single 
intraperitoneal injection of 5-Fluorouracil. Fresh stool was collected and 
analyzed using shotgun metagenomics and the Illumina sequencing platform. 
Ampicillin caused a significant and immediate decrease in bacterial species 
richness and diversity that persisted for one week. In mice that received FMT, 
disruption of the intestinal microbiota was reversed immediately. Antibiotic and 
chemotherapy administration caused significant alteration in species 
distribution, including a decrease in the relative proportions of Clostridium 
scindens and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, and an increase in known pathogenic 
species. In mice receiving FMT, we observed a significant increase in species 
known to exhibit anti-inflammatory properties. Moreover, chemotherapy led to a 
critical decrease in key 'health-promoting' species and to an altered functional 
profile, especially when chemotherapy was administered in tandem with 
antibiotics, and that FMT can ameliorate these effects.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-24342-x
PMCID: PMC5906603
PMID: 29670191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.


674. J Cell Mol Med. 2018 Apr;22(4):2469-2477. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.13555. Epub 2018 Jan 
31.

Clostridium difficile toxin B induces autophagic cell death in colonocytes.

Chan H(1), Zhao S(1), Zhang L(1), Ho J(1), Leung CCH(1), Wong WT(1), Tian Y(1), 
Liu X(1), Kwong TNY(2)(3), Chan RCY(4), Yu SSB(5), Wang MHT(6), Tse G(2), Wong 
SH(2)(3), Chan MTV(1), Wu WKK(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Medicine & Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Digestive Disease, LKS Institute of Health Sciences, 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(4)Department of Microbiology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong.
(5)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong.
(6)The Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

Toxin B (TcdB) is a major pathogenic factor of Clostridum difficile. However, 
the mechanism by which TcdB exerts its cytotoxic action in host cells is still 
not completely known. Herein, we report for the first time that TcdB induced 
autophagic cell death in cultured human colonocytes. The induction of autophagy 
was demonstrated by the increased levels of LC3-II, formation of LC3+ 
autophagosomes, accumulation of acidic vesicular organelles and reduced levels 
of the autophagic substrate p62/SQSTM1. TcdB-induced autophagy was also 
accompanied by the repression of phosphoinositide 3-kinase 
(PI3K)/Akt/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 activity. 
Functionally, pharmacological inhibition of autophagy by wortmannin or 
chloroquine or knockdown of autophagy-related genes Beclin 1, Atg5 and Atg7 
attenuated TcdB-induced cell death in colonocytes. Genetic ablation of Atg5, a 
gene required for autophagosome formation, also mitigated the cytotoxic effect 
of TcdB. In conclusion, our study demonstrated that autophagy serves as a 
pro-death mechanism mediating the cytotoxic action of TcdB in colonocytes. This 
discovery suggested that blockade of autophagy might be a novel therapeutic 
strategy for C. difficile infection.

© 2018 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jcmm.13555
PMCID: PMC5867081
PMID: 29383879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


675. J Cell Physiol. 2017 Sep;232(9):2489-2496. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25594. Epub 2017 Apr 
10.

Use of a Collagen Membrane to Enhance the Survival of Primary Intestinal 
Epithelial Cells.

Di Claudio F(1), Muglia CI(1), Smaldini PL(1), Orsini Delgado ML(1), Trejo 
FM(2), Grigera JR(3), Docena GH(1).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Estudios Inmunológicos y Fisiopatológicos (IIFP), CONICET y 
Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.
(2)Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo en Tecnología de Alimentos (CIDCA), 
CONICET y Universidad Nacional de La Plata, La Plata, Argentina.
(3)Centro de Química Inorgánica (CEQUINOR), CONICET y Universidad Nacional de La 
Plata, La Plata, Argentina.

Intestinal epithelial cell culture is important for biological, functional, and 
immunological studies. Since enterocytes have a short in vivo life span due to 
anoikis, we aimed to establish a novel and reproducible method to prolong the 
survival of mouse and human cells. Cells were isolated following a standard 
procedure, and cultured on ordered-cow's collagen membranes. A prolonged cell 
life span was achieved; cells covered the complete surface of bio-membranes and 
showed a classical enterocyte morphology with high expression of enzymes 
supporting the possibility of cryopreservation. Apoptosis was dramatically 
reduced and cultured enterocytes expressed cytokeratin and LGR5 (low frequency). 
Cells exposed to LPS or flagellin showed the induction of TLR4 and TLR5 
expression and a functional phenotype upon exposure to the probiotic 
Bifidobacterium bifidum or the pathogenic Clostridium difficile. The secretion 
of the homeostatic (IL-25 and TSLP), inhibitory (IL-10 and TGF-β), or 
pro-inflammatory mediators (IL-1β and TNF) were induced. In conclusion, this 
novel protocol using cow's collagen-ordered membrane provides a simple and 
reproducible method to maintain intestinal epithelial cells functional for 
cell-microorganism interaction studies and stem cell expansion. J. Cell. 
Physiol. 232: 2489-2496, 2017. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jcp.25594
PMID: 27626762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


676. J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 13;290(46):27880-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.658070. Epub 
2015 Sep 22.

Mechanisms of Ricin Toxin Neutralization Revealed through Engineered Homodimeric 
and Heterodimeric Camelid Antibodies.

Herrera C(1), Tremblay JM(2), Shoemaker CB(2), Mantis NJ(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Infectious Disease, Wadsworth Center, New York State 
Department of Health, Albany, New York 12208, the Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, University at Albany School of Public Health, Albany, New York 12201, 
and.
(2)the Department of Infectious Disease and Global Health, Tufts Cummings School 
of Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, Massachuetts 01536.
(3)From the Division of Infectious Disease, Wadsworth Center, New York State 
Department of Health, Albany, New York 12208, the Department of Biomedical 
Sciences, University at Albany School of Public Health, Albany, New York 12201, 
and nicholas.mantis@health.ny.gov.

Novel antibody constructs consisting of two or more different camelid 
heavy-chain only antibodies (VHHs) joined via peptide linkers have proven to 
have potent toxin-neutralizing activity in vivo against Shiga, botulinum, 
Clostridium difficile, anthrax, and ricin toxins. However, the mechanisms by 
which these so-called bispecific VHH heterodimers promote toxin neutralization 
remain poorly understood. In the current study we produced a new collection of 
ricin-specific VHH heterodimers, as well as VHH homodimers, and characterized 
them for their ability neutralize ricin in vitro and in vivo. We demonstrate 
that the VHH heterodimers, but not homodimers were able to completely protect 
mice against ricin challenge, even though the two classes of antibodies 
(heterodimers and homodimers) had virtually identical affinities for ricin 
holotoxin and similar IC50 values in a Vero cell cytotoxicity assay. The VHH 
heterodimers did differ from the homodimers in their ability to promote toxin 
aggregation in solution, as revealed through analytical ultracentrifugation. 
Moreover, the VHH heterodimers that were most effective at promoting ricin 
aggregation in solution were also the most effective at blocking ricin 
attachment to cell surfaces. Collectively, these data suggest that heterodimeric 
VHH-based neutralizing agents may function through the formation of 
antibody-toxin complexes that are impaired in their ability to access host cell 
receptors.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.658070
PMCID: PMC4646030
PMID: 26396190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


677. Water Res. 2017 Nov 1;124:259-268. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2017.07.061. Epub 2017 
Jul 24.

Fate of antibiotic resistance genes and their associations with bacterial 
community in livestock breeding wastewater and its receiving river water.

Jia S(1), Zhang XX(2), Miao Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Ye L(1), Li B(3), Zhang T(3).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, School of the 
Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse, School of the 
Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing, 210023, China. Electronic address: 
zhangxx@nju.edu.cn.
(3)Environmental Biotechnology Lab, Department of Civil Engineering, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region.

Large amounts of antibiotics are currently used in livestock breeding, which is 
the main driving factor contributing to the occurrence, spread and proliferation 
of antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB) and antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in 
the environment. In this study, high-throughput sequencing based metagenomic 
approaches were employed to characterize the tempo-spacial changes of antibiotic 
resistome, bacterial community and their correlations in pig farming wastewater 
and its receiving river. A total of 194 ARG subtypes within 14 ARG types were 
detectable in all the samples, and their total relative abundance increased in 
the river water after receiving wastewater discharge, while decreased in the 
downstream river water. Network analysis showed that 25.26% ARGs within the same 
type or among the different types showed higher incidences of non-random 
co-occurrence. The wastewater discharge evidently increased bacterial diversity 
and induced bacterial community shift in the receiving river water. The genera 
of Treponema, Prevotella, Pseudomonas, Bacteroides, Oscillibacter and 
Acholeplasma dominated in the wastewater samples and almost disappeared in the 
receiving river water, but bacterial pathogens Clostridium difficile and 
Arcobacter butzleri still occurred in the receiving water. Correlation analysis 
and host analysis consistently showed that the changes in the abundances of 
several key genera like Prevotella and Treponema were significantly and 
positively correlated with the antibiotic resistome alteration. Variation 
partitioning analysis indicated that bacterial community played a more important 
role in the resistome alteration than mobile genetic elements. This study may 
help to understand the correlations among antibiotic resistome, microbiota and 
environmental conditions in the wastewater-receiving river water.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2017.07.061
PMID: 28763642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


678. Vet Microbiol. 2016 Nov 15;195:115-122. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2016.09.006. Epub 
2016 Sep 17.

Enteropathogen infections in canine puppies: (Co-)occurrence, clinical relevance 
and risk factors.

Duijvestijn M(1), Mughini-Gras L(2), Schuurman N(3), Schijf W(4), Wagenaar 
JA(5), Egberink H(6).

Author information:
(1)Utrecht University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, Yalelaan 1, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: M.Duijvestijn@uu.nl.
(2)Utrecht University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, Yalelaan 1, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands; National 
Institute for Public Health and the Environment (RIVM), Centre for Infectious 
Disease Control (CIb), PO Box 1-3720 BA Bilthoven, The Netherlands. Electronic 
address: Lapo.Mughini.gras@rivm.nl.
(3)Utrecht University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, Yalelaan 1, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: N.M.P.Schuurman@uu.nl.
(4)Utrecht University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, Yalelaan 1, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: W.Schijf@uu.nl.
(5)Utrecht University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, Yalelaan 1, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands; Central 
Veterinary Institute of Wageningen UR, Edelhertweg 15, 8219 AB Lelystad, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: J.Wagenaar@uu.nl.
(6)Utrecht University, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Department of Infectious 
Diseases and Immunology, Yalelaan 1, 3584 CL Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: H.F.Egberink@uu.nl.

Laboratory confirmation of the causative agent(s) of diarrhoea in puppies may 
allow for appropriate treatment. The presence of potential pathogens however, 
does not prove a causal relationship with diarrhoea. The aim of this study was 
to identify specific enteropathogens in ≤12 month old puppies with and without 
acute diarrhoea and to assess their associations with clinical signs, putative 
risk factors and pathogen co-occurrence. Faecal samples from puppies with 
(n=113) and without (n=56) acute diarrhoea were collected and screened for 
Canine Parvovirus (CPV), Canine Coronavirus (CCoV), Salmonella spp., 
Campylobacter spp., Clostridium perfringens, Clostridium difficile, β-hemolytic 
Eschericha coli (hEC), Giardia spp., Toxocara spp., Cystoisospora spp., and 
Cyniclomyces guttulatus. One or more pathogens were detected in 86.5% of 
diarrhoeic puppies and in 77.8% of asymptomatic puppies. Significant positive 
associations were found between CPV and CCoV, CPV and Cystoisospora spp., 
Toxocara spp. and hEC, Giardia spp. and C. guttulatus. Only CPV and CCoV were 
significantly associated with diarrhoea, hEC with a subset of puppies that had 
diarrhoea and severe clinical signs. CPV was more prevalent in puppies under 3 
months of age. Puppies from high-volume dog breeders were significantly at 
increased risk for CPV (OR 4.20), CCoV (OR 4.50) and Cystoisospora spp. (OR 
3.60). CCoV occurred significantly more often in winter (OR 3.35), and CPV in 
winter (OR 3.78) and spring (OR 4.72) as compared to summer. We conclude that 
routine screening for CPV, CCoV and hEC is recommended in puppies with acute 
diarrhoea, especially if they are under 3 months of age and originate from 
high-volume dog breeders. Routine screening for other pathogens may lead to less 
conclusive results.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2016.09.006
PMCID: PMC7130724
PMID: 27771056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


679. Biochemistry. 2009 Mar 3;48(8):1785-92. doi: 10.1021/bi800708b.

Killing of rat basophilic leukemia cells by lethal toxin from Clostridium 
sordellii: critical role of phosphatidylinositide 3'-OH kinase/Akt signaling.

Dreger SC(1), Schulz F, Huelsenbeck J, Gerhard R, Hofmann F, Just I, Genth H.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Toxikologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, D-30625 Hannover, 
Germany.

Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin (TcsL) belongs to the family of clostridial 
glucosylating toxins. TcsL exhibits glucosyltransferase activity to inactivate 
Rho and Ras proteins. On cultured cells, TcsL causes actin reorganization 
("cytopathic effect") and apoptotic cell death ("cytotoxic effect"). This study 
is based on the concept that the cytotoxic effects of TcsL depend on the 
glucosylation of critical substrate proteins rather than on the 
glucosyltransferase activity per se. The cytotoxic effects of TcsL depend on the 
glucosyltransferase activity of TcsL, as neither chemically inactivated TcsL nor 
a glucosyltransferase-deficient mutant version of TcsL caused it. The TcsL 
homologous toxin B from Clostridium difficile serotype F strain 1470 (TcdBF) 
also failed to cause cytotoxic effects. Correlation of the toxins' respective 
protein substrate specificities highlighted (H/K/N)Ras as critical substrate 
proteins for the cytotoxic effects. (H/K/N)Ras are critical upstream regulators 
of phosphatidylinositide 3'-OH kinase (PI3K)/Akt survival signaling. 
Tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) classified to activate PI3K/Akt signaling 
downstream of apoptosis-inducing stimuli prevented the cytotoxic effects of 
TcsL. In conclusion, (H/K/N)Ras glucosylation and subsequent inhibition of 
PI3K/Akt signaling are critical for the cytotoxic effects of TcsL.

DOI: 10.1021/bi800708b
PMID: 19199813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


680. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 May 31;1485(2-3):153-62. doi: 
10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00036-6.

Activation of astroglial phospholipase D activity by phorbol ester involves ARF 
and Rho proteins.

Kötter K(1), Ji a S, von Eichel-Streiber C, Park JB, Ryu SH, Klein J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Mainz, Germany.

Primary cultures of rat cortical astrocytes express phospholipase D (PLD) 
isoforms 1 and 2 as determined by RT-PCR and Western blot. Basal PLD activity 
was strongly (10-fold) increased by 4beta-phorbol-12beta,13alpha-dibutyrate 
(PDB) (EC(50): 56 nM), an effect which was inhibited by Ro 31-8220 (0.1-1 
microM), an inhibitor of protein kinase C (PKC), and by brefeldin A (10-100 
microg/ml), an inhibitor of ADP-ribosylating factor (ARF) activation. 
Pretreatment of the cultures with Clostridium difficile toxin B-10463 (0.1-1 
ng/ml), which inactivates small G proteins of the Rho family, led to a breakdown 
of the astroglial cytoskeleton; concomitantly, PLD activation by PDB was reduced 
by up to 50%. In contrast, inactivation of proteins of the Ras family by 
Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin 1522 did not affect PLD activation. In 
parallel experiments, serum-induced PLD activation was sensitive to brefeldin A, 
but not to Ro 31-8220 and not to clostridial toxins. We conclude that, in 
astrocytes, the PLD isoform which is activated by phorbol ester requires PKC, 
ARF and Rho proteins for full activity and probably represents PLD1.

DOI: 10.1016/s1388-1981(00)00036-6
PMID: 10832096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


681. Endocrinology. 2008 Mar;149(3):1009-14. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-0864. Epub 2007 Dec 
13.

Aldosterone induces superoxide generation via Rac1 activation in endothelial 
cells.

Iwashima F(1), Yoshimoto T, Minami I, Sakurada M, Hirono Y, Hirata Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Endocrinology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University Graduate School, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8513, Japan.

Currently, aldosterone is believed to be involved in the development of 
cardiovascular injury as a potential cardiovascular risk hormone. However, its 
exact cellular mechanisms remain obscure. This study was undertaken to examine 
the effect of aldosterone on superoxide production in cultured rat aortic 
endothelial cells with possible involvement of the small GTP-binding (G) protein 
Rac1. The aldosterone levels showed a time-dependent (6-24 h) and dose-dependent 
(10(-8) to 10(-6) m) increase in superoxide generation, whose effect was 
abolished by mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (eplerenone), Src inhibitor 
(PP2), and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate [NAD(P)H] oxidase 
inhibitor (apocynin). Aldosterone activated NADP(H) oxidase and Rac1, whose 
effects were abolished by eplerenone. The aldosterone-induced superoxide 
generation was abolished either by nonselective small G protein inhibitor 
(Clostridium difficile toxin A) or dominant-negative Rac1. Dominant-negative 
Rac1 also inhibited aldosterone-induced ACE gene expression. Thus, the present 
study is the first to demonstrate that aldosterone induces superoxide generation 
via mineralocorticoid receptor-mediated activation of NAD(P)H-oxidase and Rac1 
in endothelial cells, thereby contributing to the development of 
aldosterone-induced vascular injury.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2007-0864
PMID: 18079208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


682. J Clin Invest. 1999 Mar;103(6):843-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI4217.

Neurotensin is a proinflammatory neuropeptide in colonic inflammation.

Castagliuolo I(1), Wang CC, Valenick L, Pasha A, Nikulasson S, Carraway RE, 
Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. icastagl@bidmc.harvard.edu

The neuropeptide neurotensin mediates several intestinal functions, including 
chloride secretion, motility, and cellular growth. However, whether this peptide 
participates in intestinal inflammation is not known. Toxin A, an enterotoxin 
from Clostridium difficile, mediates pseudomembranous colitis in humans. In 
animal models, toxin A causes an acute inflammatory response characterized by 
activation of sensory neurons and intestinal nerves and immune cells of the 
lamina propria. Here we show that neurotensin and its receptor are elevated in 
the rat colonic mucosa following toxin A administration. Pretreatment of rats 
with the neurotensin receptor antagonist SR-48, 692 inhibits toxin A-induced 
changes in colonic secretion, mucosal permeability, and histologic damage. 
Exposure of colonic explants to toxin A or neurotensin causes mast cell 
degranulation, which is inhibited by SR-48,692. Because substance P was 
previously shown to mediate mast cell activation, we examined whether substance 
P is involved in neurotensin-induced mast cell degranulation. Our results show 
that neurotensin-induced mast cell degranulation in colonic explants is 
inhibited by the substance P (neurokinin-1) receptor antagonist CP-96,345, 
indicating that colonic mast activation in response to neurotensin involves 
release of substance P. We conclude that neurotensin plays a key role in the 
pathogenesis of C. difficile-induced colonic inflammation and mast cell 
activation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI4217
PMCID: PMC408137
PMID: 10079105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


683. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2000 Jun;278(6):H1762-8. doi: 
10.1152/ajpheart.2000.278.6.H1762.

Inhibition of Rho protein stimulates iNOS expression in rat vascular smooth 
muscle cells.

Muniyappa R(1), Xu R, Ram JL, Sowers JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
Michigan 48201, USA.

Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) 
is upregulated in arterial injury and plays a role in regulating VSMC 
proliferation and restenosis. Inflammatory cytokines [e.g., interleukin-1beta 
(IL-1beta)] released during vascular injury induce iNOS. Small GTP-binding 
proteins of the Ras superfamily play a major role in IL-1beta-dependent 
signaling pathways. In this study, we examined the role of Rho GTPases in 
regulating iNOS expression in VSMCs. Treatment of VSMCs with mevastatin, which 
inhibits isoprenylation of Rho and other small GTP-binding proteins, produced 
significantly higher amounts of IL-1beta-evoked NO and iNOS protein compared 
with control. Similarly, bacterial toxins [Toxin B from Clostridium difficile 
and C3 ADP-ribosyl transferase (C3) toxin from Clostridium botulinium] that 
specifically inactivate Rho proteins increased NOS products (NO and citrulline) 
and iNOS expression. Toxin B increased the activity of iNOS promoter-reporter 
construct in VSMCs. Both toxins enhanced IL-1beta-stimulated iNOS expression and 
NO production. These data demonstrate for the first time that inhibition of Rho 
induces iNOS and suggest a role for Rho protein in IL-1beta-stimulated NO 
production in VSMCs.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.2000.278.6.H1762
PMID: 10843870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


684. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1997 Nov;40(5):631-7. doi: 10.1093/jac/40.5.631.

Comparative in-vitro and in-vivo activity of AM-1155 against anaerobic bacteria.

Kato N(1), Kato H, Tanaka-Bandoh K, Watanabe K, Ueno K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Anaerobic Bacteriology, Gifu University School of Medicine, 
Japan. nk19@cc.gifu-u.ac.jp

The in-vitro activity of AM-1155, a 6-fluoro-8-methoxy quinolone, was compared 
with those of temafloxacin, sparfloxacin, tosufloxacin, ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin 
and cefmetazole, a cephamycin, against a variety of anaerobic bacteria. Although 
AM-1155 demonstrated only modest activity against the Bacteroides fragilis group 
and Prevotella bivia (MIC90s > or =3.13 mg/mL), 76% of the B. fragilis strains 
tested were inhibited at AM-1155 concentrations of 0.78 mg/L. AM-1155 was highly 
active against Prevotella intermedia, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Fusobacterium 
spp., Clostridium perfringens and Mobiluncus spp. (MIC90s < or =0.39 mg/L). An 
in-vivo study using a mixed infection with AM-1155- and tosufloxacin-susceptible 
B. fragilis and Escherichia coli strains in rat granuloma pouch was performed. 
AM-1155 was effective against both organisms whereas tosufloxacin was effective 
only against E. coli. These results correlated well to the higher pouch levels 
of AM-1155 than those of tosufloxacin. Clostridium difficile overgrowth was 
found in the caecum of mice treated with ampicillin both 1 and 7 days after 5 
days dosing, but not in AM-1155-treated mice. These results suggest that the 
clinical efficacy of AM-1155 against infections involving most anaerobic 
bacteria except for the B. fragilis group and P. bivia should be evaluated 
further.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/40.5.631
PMID: 9421310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


685. BMC Vet Res. 2013 Oct 12;9:206. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-9-206.

Microbiological, pathological and histological findings in four Danish pig herds 
affected by a new neonatal diarrhoea syndrome.

Kongsted H(1), Jonach B, Haugegaard S, Angen O, Jorsal SE, Kokotovic B, Larsen 
LE, Jensen TK, Nielsen JP.

Author information:
(1)Pig Research Centre, Danish Agriculture & Food Council, Vinkelvej 13, 
Kjellerup 8620, Denmark. hko@lf.dk.

BACKGROUND: Neonatal diarrhoea is a frequent clinical condition in commercial 
swine herds, previously regarded to be uncomplicated to treat. However, since 
2008 it seems that a new neonatal diarrhoeic syndrome unresponsive to 
antibiotics and common management practices has emerged. Routine laboratory 
examinations have not detected any pathogen related to this syndrome. The 
primary purpose of this study was to evaluate if well-known enteric pathogens 
could be associated with outbreaks of neonatal diarrhoea, thus question the 
hypotheses of a new syndrome. Furthermore, we wanted to evaluate macroscopic and 
microscopic findings associated with these outbreaks and if possible propose a 
preliminary piglet-level case-definition on syndrome New Neonatal Porcine 
Diarrhoea syndrome (NNPDS).
RESULTS: Four well-managed herds experiencing neonatal diarrhoea with no 
previously established laboratory conclusion and suspected to suffer from New 
Neonatal Porcine Diarrhoea Syndrome, were selected. Within these herds, 51 
diarrhoeic and 50 non-diarrhoeic piglets at the age of three to seven days were 
necropsied and subjected to histological and microbiological examination. Faeces 
were non-haemorrhagic. Neither enterotoxigenic E. coli, Clostridium perfringens 
type A or C, Clostridium difficile, rotavirus, coronavirus, Cryptosporidium spp, 
Giardia spp, Cystoisospora suis nor Strongyloides ransomi were associated with 
diarrhoea in the investigated outbreaks. Macroscopically, the diarrhoeic piglets 
were characterized by filled stomachs and flaccid intestines without mucosal 
changes. The predominant histological lesions were villous atrophy in jejunum 
and ileum. Epithelial lesions in colon were seen in one third of the case 
piglets.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study supported the hypothesis that a new 
neonatal porcine diarrhoea was present in the investigated herds, since no known 
pathogen(s) or management factors could explain the diarrhoeal outbreaks. Based 
on the findings in the four herds the following case-definition of NNPDS was 
suggested: Non-haemorrhagic diarrhoea during the first week of life, without 
detection of known infectious pathogens, characterized by milk-filled stomachs 
and flaccid intestines at necropsy.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-6148-9-206
PMCID: PMC3852778
PMID: 24119974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


686. BMC Vet Res. 2014 Apr 22;10:90. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-10-90.

The effect of New Neonatal Porcine Diarrhoea Syndrome (NNPDS) on average daily 
gain and mortality in 4 Danish pig herds.

Kongsted H(1), Stege H, Toft N, Nielsen JP.

Author information:
(1)Danish Pig Research Centre, Danish Agriculture and Food Council, Vinkelvej 
13, Kjellerup 8620, Denmark. hko@lf.dk.

BACKGROUND: The study evaluated the effect of New Neonatal Porcine Diarrhoea 
Syndrome (NNPDS) on average daily gain (ADG) and mortality and described the 
clinical manifestations in four herds suffering from the syndrome. NNPDS is a 
diarrhoeic syndrome affecting piglets within the first week of life, which is 
not caused by enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), Clostridium perfringens 
(C. perfringens) type A/C, Clostridium difficile (C. difficile), rotavirus A, 
coronavirus, Cystoisospora suis, Strongyloides ransomi, Giardia spp or 
Cryptosporidium spp.
RESULTS: Piglets were estimated to have a negative ADG of 9 and 14 g when 
diarrhoeic for 1 day and >1 day respectively. However, if only diarrhoeic on the 
day of birth, no negative effect on ADG was seen. Piglets originating from 
severely affected litters were estimated to have a reduced ADG of 38 g. The 
study did not show an overall effect of diarrhoea on mortality, but herd of 
origin, sow parity, birth weight, and gender were significantly associated with 
mortality. In one of the herds, approximately 25% of the diarrhoeic piglets vs. 
6% of the non-diarrhoeic piglets died, and 74% of necropsied piglets were 
diagnosed with enteritis. These findings indicate that the high mortality seen 
in this herd was due to diarrhoea.
CONCLUSIONS: NNPDS negatively affected ADG in piglets, and even piglets that 
were diarrhoeic for one day only experienced a reduction in ADG. However, the 
study showed that diarrhoea restricted to the day of birth did not affect ADG 
and suggested this phenomenon to be unrelated to the syndrome. Since the 
diarrhoeal status of the litter had important effects on ADG, future research on 
NNPDS probably ought to focus on piglets from severely affected litters.The 
study showed important dissimilarities in the course of diarrhoea between the 
herds, and one herd was considerably more affected than the others. Within this 
herd, NNPDS seemed to be associated with a higher mortality, whereas in general 
the study did not show lethal effects of NNPDS.

DOI: 10.1186/1746-6148-10-90
PMCID: PMC3999350
PMID: 24755093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


687. Cardiovasc Res. 2008 Nov 1;80(2):290-8. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn188. Epub 2008 Jul 
3.

Rho GTPase, Rac1, regulates Skp2 levels, vascular smooth muscle cell 
proliferation, and intima formation in vitro and in vivo.

Bond M(1), Wu YJ, Sala-Newby GB, Newby AC.

Author information:
(1)Bristol Heart Institute, University of Bristol, Level 7, Bristol Royal 
Infirmary, Bristol BS2 8HW, UK. mark.bond@bristol.ac.uk

AIMS: Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation contributes to intima 
formation after angioplasty or venous by-pass grafting, and during 
atherosclerosis. VSMC proliferation requires degradation of p27(Kip1) promoted 
by S-phase kinase-associated protein-2 (Skp2), an F-box protein component of the 
Skp-Cullin-F-box(Skp2) ubiquitin-ligase. We investigated the role of Rac(1) in 
the regulation of Skp2 in rat VSMC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rat carotid balloon injury increased Rac(1) activity. Rho 
GTPase inhibition with Clostridium difficile Toxin B or specific Rac(1) 
inhibition with adenovirus-mediated expression of dominant-negative Rac(1) 
reduced Skp2 levels, and VSMC proliferation in vitro and intima formation in 
vivo following carotid balloon injury. Inhibition of Skp2 expression and 
proliferation by dominant-negative Rac(1) was reversed by exogenous Skp2. 
Elevation of endogenous adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) with 
forskolin-inhibited Rac(1) activity, reduced Skp2, increased p27(Kip1) and 
inhibited VSMC proliferation, effects that were reversed by constitutively 
active Rac(1). These effects were independent of Rac(1) Cdc42/Rac interactive 
binding (CRIB)-domain effector proteins but associated with Rac(1)-dependent 
actin polymerization.
CONCLUSION: Rac(1) activity regulates VSMC proliferation by controlling Skp2 
levels. Activation of Rac(1) induced by balloon injury in vivo increases Skp2 
levels, which promotes VSMC proliferation and intima formation. Inhibition of 
this novel pathway underlies the negative effects of cAMP on VSMC proliferation.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvn188
PMID: 18599477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


688. Integr Biol (Camb). 2015 Jul;7(7):740-57. doi: 10.1039/c5ib00030k.

Multiscale analysis of the murine intestine for modeling human diseases.

Lyons J(1), Herring CA, Banerjee A, Simmons AJ, Lau KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

When functioning properly, the intestine is one of the key interfaces between 
the human body and its environment. It is responsible for extracting nutrients 
from our food and excreting our waste products. It provides an environment for a 
host of healthful microbes and serves as a first defense against pathogenic 
ones. These processes require tight homeostatic controls, which are provided by 
the interactions of a complex mix of epithelial, stromal, neural and immune 
cells, as well as the resident microflora. This homeostasis can be disrupted by 
invasive microbes, genetic lesions, and carcinogens, resulting in diseases such 
Clostridium difficile infection, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and cancer. 
Enormous strides have been made in understanding how this important organ 
functions in health and disease using everything from cell culture systems to 
animal models to human tissue samples. This has resulted in better therapies for 
all of these diseases, but there is still significant room for improvement. In 
the United States alone, 14,000 people per year die of C. difficile, up to 1.6 
million people suffer from IBD, and more than 50,000 people die every year from 
colon cancer. Because these and other intestinal diseases arise from complex 
interactions between the different components of the gut ecosystem, we propose 
that systems approaches that address this complexity in an integrative manner 
may eventually lead to improved therapeutics that deliver lasting cures. This 
review will discuss the use of systems biology for studying intestinal diseases 
in vivo with particular emphasis on mouse models. Additionally, it will focus on 
established experimental techniques that have been used to drive this 
systems-level analysis, and emerging techniques that will push this field 
forward in the future.

DOI: 10.1039/c5ib00030k
PMCID: PMC4569017
PMID: 26040649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


689. Rinsho Biseibutshu Jinsoku Shindan Kenkyukai Shi. 1998;9(2):97-104.

[Human diseases caused by exotoxins produced by anaerobes and their rapid 
detection].

[Article in Japanese]

Kato N(1), Kato H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Anaerobic Bacteriology, Gifu University School of Medicine, 40 
Tsukasa-machi, Gifu 500-8705, Japan.

Major human diseases caused by exotoxins produced by anaerobes include 
botulisms, tetanus, foodborne illness caused by enterotoxin-producing 
Clostridium perfringens, and diarrhea/colitis caused by toxigenic Clostridium 
difficile. Recently, enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF) has been 
recognized, that may be related to childhood diarrheal disease. Detection test 
of botulinal neurotoxin is hardly performed at clinical laboratories since the 
most reliable means of detection and identification of botulinal toxin is by 
using mouse toxicity and neutralization tests. Clinical laboratories should 
request the tests to a reference laboratory. Since tetanus is easily diagnosed 
clinically on the basis of its unique, recognizable sings, the bacteriological 
tests is not usually requested. C. perfringens foodborne illness can be 
confirmed by testing stool specimens or the suspect food(s) for enterotoxin by 
the reversed passive latex agglutination test or counting > 10 5 C. perfringens 
per g of suspected food or > 10 6 C. perfringens spores per g of stool. 
Diagnosis of C. difficile-associated diarrhea/colitis is confirmed by detection 
of toxins A or B of C. difficile and/or recovery of toxigenic C. difficile. 
Isolation of C. difficile strains or detection C. difficile-speciffic antigen 
from stool specimens is less diagnostic since nontoxic or toxin A positive-toxin 
B negative strains are prevalent in Japan. Reliable laboratory tests for 
ETBF-associated childhood diarrhea are not established yet although ETBF can be 
proved by polymerase chain reaction for detection of the enterotoxin gene.

PMID: 10036379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


690. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Nov;49(5):781-90. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.07.017. 
Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Inhibition of Rho-ROCK signaling induces apoptotic and non-apoptotic PS exposure 
in cardiomyocytes via inhibition of flippase.

Krijnen PA(1), Sipkens JA, Molling JW, Rauwerda JA, Stehouwer CD, Muller A, 
Paulus WJ, van Nieuw Amerongen GP, Hack CE, Verhoeven AJ, van Hinsbergh VW, 
Niessen HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
paj.krijnen@vumc.nl

Subsequent to myocardial infarction, cardiomyocytes within the infarcted areas 
and border zones expose phosphatidylserine (PS) in the outer plasma membrane 
leaflet (flip-flop). We showed earlier that in addition to apoptosis, this 
flip-flop can be reversible in cardiomyocytes. We now investigated a possible 
role for Rho and downstream effector Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) in the process 
of (reversible) PS exposure and apoptosis in cardiomyocytes. In rat 
cardiomyoblasts (H9c2 cells) and isolated adult ventricular rat cardiomyocytes 
Clostridium difficile Toxin B (TcdB), a Rho GTPase family inhibitor, C3 
transferase (C3), a Rho(A,B,C) inhibitor and the ROCK inhibitors Y27632 and 
H1152 were used to inhibit Rho-ROCK signaling. PS exposure was assessed via flow 
cytometry and fluorescent digital imaging microscopy using annexin V. Akt 
expression and phosphorylation were analyzed via Western blot, and Akt activity 
was inhibited by wortmannin. The cellular concentration activated caspase 3 was 
determined as a measure of apoptosis, and flippase activity was assessed via 
flow cytometry using NBD-labeled PS. TcdB, C3, Y27632 and H1152 all 
significantly increased PS exposure. TcdB, Y27632 and H1152 all significantly 
inhibited phosphorylation of the anti-apoptotic protein Akt and Akt inhibition 
by wortmannin lead to increased PS exposure. However, only TcdB and C3, but not 
ROCK- or Akt inhibition led to caspase 3 activation and thus apoptosis. Notably, 
pancaspase inhibitor zVAD only partially inhibited TcdB-induced PS exposure 
indicating the existence of apoptotic and non-apoptotic PS exposure. The induced 
PS exposure coincided with decreased flippase activity as measured with 
NBD-labeled PS flip-flop. In this study, we show a regulatory role for a novel 
signaling route, Rho-ROCK-flippase signaling, in maintaining asymmetrical 
membrane phospholipid distribution in cardiomyocytes.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.07.017
PMID: 20691698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


691. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 22;278(34):32266-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M303980200. Epub 
2003 Jun 12.

The host cell chaperone Hsp90 is essential for translocation of the binary 
Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin into the cytosol.

Haug G(1), Leemhuis J, Tiemann D, Meyer DK, Aktories K, Barth H.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie der 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Albertstrasse 25 (Otto-Krayer-Haus), 
D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Clostridium botulinum C2 toxin is the prototype of the binary 
actin-ADP-ribosylating toxins and consists of the binding component C2II and the 
enzyme component C2I. The activated binding component C2IIa forms heptamers, 
which bind to carbohydrates on the cell surface and interact with the enzyme 
component C2I. This toxin complex is taken up by receptor-mediated endocytosis. 
In acidic endosomes, heptameric C2IIa forms pores and mediates the translocation 
of C2I into the cytosol. We report that the heat shock protein (Hsp) 90-specific 
inhibitors, geldanamycin or radicicol, block intoxication of Vero cells, rat 
astrocytes, and HeLa cells by C2 toxin. ADP-ribosylation of actin in the cytosol 
of toxin-treated cells revealed that less active C2I was translocated into the 
cytosol after treatment with Hsp90 inhibitors. Under control conditions, C2I was 
localized in the cytosol of toxin-treated rat astrocytes, whereas geldanamycin 
blocked the cytosolic distribution of C2I. At low extracellular pH (pH 4.5), 
which allows the direct translocation of C2I via C2IIa heptamers across the cell 
membrane into the cytosol, Hsp90 inhibitors retarded intoxication by C2I. 
Geldanamycin did not affect toxin binding, endocytosis, and pore formation by 
C2IIa. The ADP-ribosyltransferase activity of C2I was not affected by Hsp90 
inhibitors in vitro. The cytotoxic actions of the actin-ADP-ribosylating 
Clostridium perfringens iota toxin and the Rho-ADP-ribosylating C2-C3 fusion 
toxin was similarly blocked by Hsp90 inhibitors. In contrast, radicicol and 
geldanamycin had no effect on anthrax lethal toxin-induced cytotoxicity of 
J774-A1 macrophage-like cells or on cytotoxic effects of the glucosylating 
Clostridium difficile toxin B in Vero cells. The data indicate that Hsp90 is 
essential for the membrane translocation of ADP-ribosylating toxins delivered by 
C2II.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M303980200
PMID: 12805360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


692. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 15;176(12):7645-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.12.7645.

TLR2 transmodulates monocyte adhesion and transmigration via Rac1- and 
PI3K-mediated inside-out signaling in response to Porphyromonas gingivalis 
fimbriae.

Harokopakis E(1), Albzreh MH, Martin MH, Hajishengallis G.

Author information:
(1)Center for Oral Health and Systemic Disease, University of Louisville Health 
Sciences Center, KY 40292, USA.

We present evidence for a novel TLR2 function in transmodulating the adhesive 
activities of human monocytes in response to the fimbriae of Porphyromonas 
gingivalis, a pathogen implicated in chronic periodontitis and atherosclerosis. 
Monocyte recruitment into the subendothelium is a crucial step in 
atherosclerosis, and we investigated the role of P. gingivalis fimbriae in 
stimulating monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells and transendothelial 
migration. Fimbriae induced CD11b/CD18-dependent adhesion of human monocytes or 
mouse macrophages to endothelial receptor ICAM-1; these activities were 
inhibited by TLR2 blockade or deficiency or by pharmacological inhibitors of 
PI3K. Moreover, this inducible adhesive activity was sensitive to the action of 
Clostridium difficile toxin B, but was not affected by Clostridium botulinum C3 
exoenzyme, pertussis toxin, or cholera toxin. Accordingly, we subsequently 
showed through the use of dominant negative signaling mutants of small GTPases, 
that Rac1 mediates the ability of fimbria-stimulated monocytes to bind ICAM-1. A 
dominant negative mutant of Rac1 also inhibited the lipid kinase activity of 
PI3K suggesting that Rac1 acts upstream of PI3K in this proadhesive pathway. 
Furthermore, fimbriae stimulated monocyte adhesion to HUVEC and transmigration 
across HUVEC monolayers; both activities required TLR2 and Rac1 signaling and 
were dependent upon ICAM-1 and the high-affinity state of CD11b/CD18. P. 
gingivalis-stimulated monocytes displayed enhanced transendothelial migration 
compared with monocytes stimulated with nonfimbriated isogenic mutants. Thus, P. 
gingivalis fimbriae activate a novel proadhesive pathway in human monocytes, 
involving TLR2, Rac1, PI3K, and CD11b/CD18, which may constitute a mechanistic 
basis linking P. gingivalis to inflammatory atherosclerotic processes.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.12.7645
PMID: 16751412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


693. Biochem Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;83(5):608-19. doi: 10.1139/o05-066.

The association between RhoB and caspase-2: changes with lovastatin-induced 
apoptosis.

Kong JY(1), Rabkin SW.

Author information:
(1)University of BritishColumbia, Room D410, 2733 Heather Street, Vancouver, 
BCV5Z 3J5, Canada.

Because cytoskeletal actin is regulated, in part, by Rho, and because Rho and 
caspases are involved in apoptosis, we sought to determine whether there was an 
association between RhoB and caspase-2. A RhoB-caspase-2 association was 
consistently demonstrated in neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes with Western 
Blotting, either after immunoprecipitation with RhoB followed by immunoblotting 
with caspase-2, or in reciprocal experiments after immuno precipitation with 
caspase-2 and immunoblotting with RhoB (n = 14). Although the RhoB-caspase-2 
complex was constitutively present, the link between RhoB and caspase-2 may be 
operative in apoptosis because the HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor lovastatin 
increased the RhoB-caspase complex, especially in the nuclear fraction of the 
cell, with a peak occurrence 2 h after treatment. This association was 
unaffected by the caspase-2 inhibitor zVDVAD. Lovastatin produced apoptosis that 
was accompanied by an activation of caspase-2, as demonstrated by its 
immunohistochemistry and by the fact that the caspase-2 inhibitor zVDVAD reduced 
lovastatin-induced apoptosis. Lovastatin induced dramatic changes in cell 
morphology and a reduction in F-actin. Immunoblotting for actin suggests that 
lovastatin does not induce a degradation of the actin molecule, but rather 
affects filamentous F-actin. Caspase-2 inhibition with zVDVAD reduced 
lovastatin-induced alteration in cytoskeletal F-actin. The Rho inhibitor, 
Clostridium difficile toxin B, blunted the ability of lovastatin to induce 
apoptosis. In summary, these data show a previously unrecognized association 
between RhoB and caspase-2 in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions, which has 
ramifications for processes regulated by RhoB and caspase-2, including 
apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1139/o05-066
PMID: 16234849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


694. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2004 Jun;48(6):2144-8. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.48.6.2144-2148.2004.

Efficacy of oral ramoplanin for inhibition of intestinal colonization by 
vancomycin-resistant enterococci in mice.

Stiefel U(1), Pultz NJ, Helfand MS, Donskey CJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, University Hospitals of Cleveland, Case 
Western Reserve University, Ohio 44106, USA.

Ramoplanin is a glycolipodepsipeptide antibiotic with activity against 
gram-positive bacteria that is in clinical trials for prevention of 
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE) bloodstream infections and treatment of 
Clostridium difficile diarrhea. Orally administered ramoplanin suppresses VRE 
intestinal colonization, but recurrences after discontinuation of treatment have 
frequently been observed. We used a mouse model to examine the efficacy of 
ramoplanin for inhibition of VRE colonization and evaluated the etiology of 
recurrences of colonization. Eight days of treatment with ramoplanin (100 
microg/ml) in drinking water suppressed VRE to undetectable levels, but 100% of 
mice developed recurrent colonization; a higher dose of 500 microg/ml in water 
was associated with recurrent colonization in 50% of mice. Two of eight (25%) 
mice treated with the 100-microg/ml dose of ramoplanin had low levels of VRE in 
their cecal tissues on day 8 despite undetectable levels in stool and cecal 
contents. Mice that received prior ramoplanin treatment did not develop VRE 
overgrowth when challenged with 10(7) CFU of oral VRE 1, 2, or 4 days later. In 
communal cages, rapid cross-transmission and overgrowth of VRE was observed 
among clindamycin-treated mice; ramoplanin treatment effectively suppressed VRE 
overgrowth in such communal cages. Ramoplanin treatment promoted increased 
density of indigenous Enterobacteriaceae and overgrowth of an exogenously 
administered Klebsiella pneumoniae isolate. These results demonstrate the 
efficacy of ramoplanin for inhibition of VRE colonization and suggest that some 
recurrences occur due to reexpansion of organisms that persist within the lining 
of the colon. Ramoplanin treatment may be associated with overgrowth of 
gram-negative bacilli.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.48.6.2144-2148.2004
PMCID: PMC415563
PMID: 15155213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


695. mSphere. 2019 Nov 20;4(6):e00693-19. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00693-19.

The Proton Pump Inhibitor Omeprazole Does Not Promote Clostridioides difficile 
Colonization in a Murine Model.

Tomkovich S(1), Lesniak NA(1), Li Y(1), Bishop L(1), Fitzgerald MJ(1), Schloss 
PD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA pschloss@umich.edu.

Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use has been associated with microbiota alterations 
and susceptibility to Clostridioides difficile infections (CDIs) in humans. We 
assessed how PPI treatment alters the fecal microbiota and whether treatment 
promotes CDIs in a mouse model. Mice receiving a PPI treatment were gavaged with 
40 mg of omeprazole per kg of body weight during a 7-day pretreatment phase, the 
day of C. difficile challenge, and the following 9 days. We found that mice 
treated with omeprazole were not colonized by C. difficile When omeprazole 
treatment was combined with a single clindamycin treatment, one cage of mice 
remained resistant to C. difficile colonization, while the other cage was 
colonized. Treating mice with only clindamycin followed by challenge resulted in 
C. difficile colonization. 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis revealed that 
omeprazole had minimal impact on the structure of the murine microbiota 
throughout the 16 days of omeprazole exposure. These results suggest that 
omeprazole treatment alone is not sufficient to disrupt microbiota resistance to 
C. difficile infection in mice that are normally resistant in the absence of 
antibiotic treatment.IMPORTANCE Antibiotics are the primary risk factor for 
Clostridioides difficile infections (CDIs), but other factors may also increase 
a person's risk. In epidemiological studies, proton pump inhibitor (PPI) use has 
been associated with CDI incidence and recurrence. PPIs have also been 
associated with alterations in the human intestinal microbiota in observational 
and interventional studies. We evaluated the effects of the PPI omeprazole on 
the structure of the murine intestinal microbiota and its ability to disrupt 
colonization resistance to C. difficile We found omeprazole treatment had 
minimal impact on the murine fecal microbiota and did not promote C. difficile 
colonization. Further studies are needed to determine whether other factors 
contribute to the association between PPIs and CDIs seen in humans or whether 
aspects of murine physiology may limit its utility to test these types of 
hypotheses.

Copyright © 2019 Tomkovich et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00693-19
PMCID: PMC6887860
PMID: 31748246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


696. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2013 May;19(5):445-50. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2012.03852.x. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

High incidence of Campylobacter concisus in gastroenteritis in North Jutland, 
Denmark: a population-based study.

Nielsen HL(1), Ejlertsen T, Engberg J, Nielsen H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aalborg Hospital, Aarhus University 
Hospital, Hobrovej 18-22, DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark. halin@rn.dk

The incidence of non-thermophilic Campylobacter species was assessed in an 
unselected population-based study in a mixed urban and rural community in North 
Jutland, Denmark. In a 2-year study period, 11,314 faecal samples from 8302 
patients with gastroenteritis were cultured with supplement of the filter 
method. We recovered a high incidence of Campylobacter concisus (annual 
incidence 35/100,000 inhabitants), almost as high as the common Campylobacter 
jejuni/coli. In contrast, there was a very low incidence of other 
non-thermophilic Campylobacter species, such as Campylobacter upsaliensis. 
Campylobacter concisus was, unlike C. jejuni/coli, found more frequently among 
small children (<1 year) and the elderly (≥ 65 years). Around 10% of the 
patients with C. consisus had co-infections dominated by Clostridium difficile 
and Salmonella enterica, whereas co-infections occurred in about 5% of C. 
jejuni/coli patients. We observed a seasonal variation in C. jejuni/coli with a 
peak incidence in late summer months and autumn, whereas there was an almost 
constant monthly prevalence of C. concisus. Among patients participating in a 
questionnaire sub-study, there was a higher degree of close contacts with 
animals, especially dogs, as well as a higher travel exposure among C. 
jejuni/coli patients compared with C. concisus patients. We did not culture any 
C. concisus in stool samples from a small cohort of healthy individuals. Future 
studies have to focus on the clinical follow-up and the long-term risk of 
inflammatory bowel diseases in C. concisus-positive patients. We conclude that 
there is a high incidence of C. concisus in Denmark.

© 2012 The Authors. Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2012 European Society 
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2012.03852.x
PMID: 22512739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


697. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1997;419:349-53. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-8632-0_46.

ADP-ribosylating and glucosylating toxins as tools to study secretion in RBL 
cells.

Prepens U(1), Just I, Hofmann F, Aktories K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Albert-Ludwigs-Universiät, 
Freiburg, Germany.

The influence of different ADP-ribosylating and glucosylating cytotoxins on 
stimulated protein tyrosine phosphorylation and secretion in rat basophilic 
leukemia (RBL) cells was studied. Treatment of RBL cells with Clostridium 
botulinum C2 toxin, which specifically ADP-ribosylated monomeric G-actin and 
caused complete depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton in intact cells, 
inhibited Fc epsilon RI receptor-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of various 
proteins in a time- and concentration-dependent manner with maximal effects at 
100 ng/ml C2I and 200 ng/ml C2I. C2 toxin (10 ng/ml C2I and 20 ng/ml C2II) 
increased antigen- or calcium ionophore (A23187)-stimulated [3H]serotonin 
release maximally by about 3 fold. Clostridium botulinum C3, which 
ADP-ribosylated Rho in intact RBL cells, had no effect on protein tyrosine 
phosphorylation and stimulated secretion. In contrast, the cytotoxic Clostridium 
difficile toxin B (ToxB), which glucosylated the Rho-subtype family members RhoA 
and Cdc42, blocked or reduced antigen- or calcium ionophore-mediated 
[3H]serotonin release, respectively, and decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of a 
110 kDa protein. The data indicate that different actin pools control tyrosine 
phosphorylation and secretion in RBL cells and suggest that Rho subfamily 
proteins regulate secretion independently of the actin cytoskeleton.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-8632-0_46
PMID: 9193676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


698. J Neurochem. 2003 Dec;87(5):1272-83. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.02106.x.

Cyclic phosphatidic acid elicits neurotrophin-like actions in embryonic 
hippocampal neurons.

Fujiwara Y(1), Sebök A, Meakin S, Kobayashi T, Murakami-Murofushi K, Tigyi G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, The University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center, 
894 Union Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

Cyclic phosphatidic acid (cPA; 1-acyl-sn-glycerol-2,3-cyclic phosphate) is an 
analog of the growth factor-like phospholipid mediator lysophosphatidic acid 
(LPA). As brain tissue is the richest source of cPA we tested its effects on 
hippocampal neurons from day 16/17 embryonic rat cultured in a serum-free 
medium. Nanomolar concentrations of cPA elicited a neurotrophic effect and 
promoted neurite outgrowth that exceeded that of 50 ng/mL nerve growth factor 
(NGF). Pertussis toxin, the LPA1/LPA3 receptor-selective antagonist 
dioctylglycerol pyrophosphate, the myristoylated inhibitory pseudosubstrate 
peptide of protein kinase A (PKI), Wortmannin and PD98059 abolished the 
neurite-promoting effect. cPA elicited a sustained activation of extracellular 
signal-related kinases (ERK) 1/2 and Akt. Clostridium difficile toxin B, an 
inhibitor of the Rho family of GTPases, reduced cPA-induced enhancement of 
neurite outgrowth. In B5P cells, a clonal cell line of PC12 cells overexpressing 
tyrosine kinase NGF receptor (TrkA), cPA elicited transphosphorylation of TrkA. 
cPA-elicited ERK activation was blocked by K252a and PKI. These results suggest 
that cPA mimics the effects of, and activates signaling pathways similar to, the 
neurotrophin NGF in cultured embryonic hippocampal neurons and B5P cells.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.02106.x
PMID: 14622107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


699. Mol Microbiol. 1993 Feb;7(3):371-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1993.tb01129.x.

Identification and characterization of adhesive factors of Clostridium difficile 
involved in adhesion to human colonic enterocyte-like Caco-2 and mucus-secreting 
HT29 cells in culture.

Eveillard M(1), Fourel V, Barc MC, Kernéis S, Coconnier MH, Karjalainen T, 
Bourlioux P, Servin AL.

Author information:
(1)Département de Microbiologie et Immunologie, UFR Sciences Pharmaceutiques, 
Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Experiments reported in this communication showed that the highly toxinogenic Cd 
79685, Cd 4784, and Wilkins Clostridium difficile strains and the moderately 
toxinogenic FD strain grown in the presence of blood adhere to polarized 
monolayers of two cultured human intestinal cell lines: the human colonic 
epithelial Caco-2 cells and the human mucus-secreting HT29-MTX cells. Scanning 
electron microscopy revealed that the bacteria interacted with well-defined 
apical microvilli of differentiated Caco-2 cells and that the bacteria strongly 
bind to the mucus layer that entirely covers the surface of the HT29-MTX cells. 
The binding of C. difficile to Caco-2 cells developed in parallel with the 
differentiation features of the Caco-2 cells, suggesting that the protein(s) 
which constitute C. difficile-binding sites are differentiation-related brush 
border protein(s). To better define this interaction, we tentatively 
characterized the mechanism(s) of adhesion of C. difficile with adherence 
assays. It was shown that heating of C. difficile grown in the presence of blood 
enhanced the bacterial interaction with the brush border of the enterocyte-like 
Caco-2 cells and the human mucus-secreting HT29-MTX cells. A labile 
surface-associated component was involved in C. difficile adhesion since washes 
of C. difficile grown in the presence of blood without heat shock decreased 
adhesion. After heating, washes of C. difficile grown in the presence of blood 
did not modify adhesion. Analysis of surface-associated proteins of C. difficile 
subjected to different culture conditions was conducted. After growth of C. 
difficile Cd 79685, Cd 4784, FD and Wilkins strains in the presence of blood and 
heating, two predominant SDS-extractable proteins with molecular masses of 12 
and 27 kDa were observed and two other proteins with masses of 48 and 31 kDa 
disappeared. Direct involvement of the 12 and 27 kDa surface-associated proteins 
in the adhesion of C. difficile strains was demonstrated by using rat 
polycolonal antibodies pAb 12 and pAb 27 directed against the 12 and 27 kDa 
proteins. Indeed, adhesion to Caco-2 cell monolayers of C. difficile strains 
grown in the presence of blood, without or with heat-shock, was blocked. Taken 
together, our results suggest that C. difficile may utilize blood components as 
adhesins to adhere to human intestinal cultured cells.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.1993.tb01129.x
PMID: 8459765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


700. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 17;287(8):5528-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.285114. Epub 2011 
Dec 22.

Group VIA PLA2 (iPLA2β) is activated upstream of p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) in pancreatic islet β-cell signaling.

Song H(1), Wohltmann M, Tan M, Bao S, Ladenson JH, Turk J.

Author information:
(1)Mass Spectrometry Resource, Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Lipid 
Research, Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Group VIA phospholipase A(2) (iPLA(2)β) in pancreatic islet β-cells participates 
in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum ATPase 
(SERCA) inhibitor-induced apoptosis, and both are attenuated by pharmacologic or 
genetic reductions in iPLA(2)β activity and amplified by iPLA(2)β 
overexpression. While exploring signaling events that occur downstream of 
iPLA(2)β activation, we found that p38 MAPK is activated by phosphorylation in 
INS-1 insulinoma cells and mouse pancreatic islets, that this increases with 
iPLA(2)β expression level, and that it is stimulated by the iPLA(2)β reaction 
product arachidonic acid. The insulin secretagogue D-glucose also stimulates 
β-cell p38 MAPK phosphorylation, and this is prevented by the iPLA(2)β inhibitor 
bromoenol lactone. Insulin secretion induced by d-glucose and forskolin is 
amplified by overexpressing iPLA(2)β in INS-1 cells and in mouse islets, and the 
p38 MAPK inhibitor PD169316 prevents both responses. The SERCA inhibitor 
thapsigargin also stimulates phosphorylation of both β-cell MAPK kinase isoforms 
and p38 MAPK, and bromoenol lactone prevents both events. Others have reported 
that iPLA(2)β products activate Rho family G-proteins that promote MAPK kinase 
activation via a mechanism inhibited by Clostridium difficile toxin B, which we 
find to inhibit thapsigargin-induced β-cell p38 MAPK phosphorylation. 
Thapsigargin-induced β-cell apoptosis and ceramide generation are also prevented 
by the p38 MAPK inhibitor PD169316. These observations indicate that p38 MAPK is 
activated downstream of iPLA(2)β in β-cells incubated with insulin secretagogues 
or thapsigargin, that this requires prior iPLA(2)β activation, and that p38 MAPK 
is involved in the β-cell functional responses of insulin secretion and 
apoptosis in which iPLA(2)β participates.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.285114
PMCID: PMC3285329
PMID: 22194610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


701. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005 Jan 1;69(1):87-95. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2004.08.036.

Inhibitory effects of mevastatin and a geranylgeranyl transferase I inhibitor 
(GGTI-2166) on mononuclear osteoclast formation induced by receptor activator of 
NF kappa B ligand (RANKL) or tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha).

Woo JT(1), Nakagawa H, Krecic AM, Nagai K, Hamilton AD, Sebti SM, Stern PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, 303 E. Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 
60611, USA.

We have previously reported that the statin mevastatin (compactin) reversibly 
inhibits the fusion of TRAP-positive mononuclear preosteoclasts (pOCs) into 
multinucleated osteoclasts and disrupts the actin ring in mature osteoclasts 
through the inhibition of protein prenylation. Protein geranylgeranylation, 
specifically, is known to be required for pOC fusion and for the function and 
survival of mature osteoclasts. However, it has not been determined whether 
protein geranylgeranylation is involved in early differentiation of osteoclasts 
(pOC formation). The current study shows that statins and the geranylgeranyl 
transferase I inhibitor GGTI-2166 inhibit the pOC formation induced by RANKL or 
TNF-alpha in cultures of both mouse marrow-derived macrophage-colony-stimulating 
factor (M-CSF) dependent monocytes (MD cells) and the mouse monocyte cell line 
RAW 264.7 (RAW cells). Mevastatin, 0.1-0.6 microM, inhibited the formation of 
pOCs induced by receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL) or 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha) in both cell cultures. The inhibitory effects 
of mevastatin were overcome by the addition of mevalonate, farnesyl 
pyrophosphate or geranylgeranyl pyrophosphate. GGTI-2166 inhibited TRAP activity 
induced by RANKL or TNF-alpha in both cell cultures and prevented the 
incorporation of [3H]all-trans geranylgeraniol into prenylated proteins in RAW 
cells. However, the farnesyl transferase inhibitor FTI-2153 did not inhibit TRAP 
activity although FTI prevented the incorporation of [14C]mevalonate into 
farnesylated proteins in RAW cells. Clostridium difficile cytotoxin B (toxin B) 
inhibited pOC formation induced by RANKL or TNF-alpha in both cell cultures. The 
inhibitory effects of statins and GGTI-2166 on pOC formation may result from the 
inhibition of the geranylgeranylation of G-proteins, such as Rho or Rac, 
suggesting that the geranylgeranylation of these proteins is involved in the 
early differentiation of progenitor cells into pOCs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2004.08.036
PMID: 15588717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


702. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2020 Apr 7;117(14):8064-8073. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1915255117. Epub 2020 Mar 20.

Clostridioides difficile infection damages colonic stem cells via TcdB, 
impairing epithelial repair and recovery from disease.

Mileto SJ(1)(2), Jardé T(3)(4)(5), Childress KO(6), Jensen JL(6), Rogers 
AP(1)(2), Kerr G(3)(4), Hutton ML(1)(2), Sheedlo MJ(6), Bloch SC(6), Shupe 
JA(6), Horvay K(3)(4), Flores T(3)(4), Engel R(3)(4)(7), Wilkins S(7)(8), 
McMurrick PJ(7), Lacy DB(9)(10), Abud HE(11)(4)(7)(8), Lyras D(12)(2).

Author information:
(1)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, 
Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.
(3)Development and Stem Cells Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, 
Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia.
(4)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
VIC 3800, Australia.
(5)Centre for Cancer Research, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, 
VIC 3168, Australia.
(6)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232.
(7)Cabrini Monash University Department of Surgery, Cabrini Hospital, Melbourne, 
VIC 3144, Australia.
(8)Department of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, School of Public Health 
and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, VIC 3004, Australia.
(9)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232; borden.lacy@vanderbilt.edu 
helen.abud@monash.edu dena.lyras@monash.edu.
(10)The Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville, TN 
37232.
(11)Development and Stem Cells Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, 
Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia; borden.lacy@vanderbilt.edu 
helen.abud@monash.edu dena.lyras@monash.edu.
(12)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, 
Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia; borden.lacy@vanderbilt.edu 
helen.abud@monash.edu dena.lyras@monash.edu.

Gastrointestinal infections often induce epithelial damage that must be repaired 
for optimal gut function. While intestinal stem cells are critical for this 
regeneration process [R. C. van der Wath, B. S. Gardiner, A. W. Burgess, D. W. 
Smith, PLoS One 8, e73204 (2013); S. Kozar et al., Cell Stem Cell 13, 626-633 
(2013)], how they are impacted by enteric infections remains poorly defined. 
Here, we investigate infection-mediated damage to the colonic stem cell 
compartment and how this affects epithelial repair and recovery from infection. 
Using the pathogen Clostridioides difficile, we show that infection disrupts 
murine intestinal cellular organization and integrity deep into the epithelium, 
to expose the otherwise protected stem cell compartment, in a TcdB-mediated 
process. Exposure and susceptibility of colonic stem cells to intoxication 
compromises their function during infection, which diminishes their ability to 
repair the injured epithelium, shown by altered stem cell signaling and a 
reduction in the growth of colonic organoids from stem cells isolated from 
infected mice. We also show, using both mouse and human colonic organoids, that 
TcdB from epidemic ribotype 027 strains does not require Frizzled 1/2/7 binding 
to elicit this dysfunctional stem cell state. This stem cell dysfunction induces 
a significant delay in recovery and repair of the intestinal epithelium of up to 
2 wk post the infection peak. Our results uncover a mechanism by which an 
enteric pathogen subverts repair processes by targeting stem cells during 
infection and preventing epithelial regeneration, which prolongs epithelial 
barrier impairment and creates an environment in which disease recurrence is 
likely.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1915255117
PMCID: PMC7149309
PMID: 32198200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.


703. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2011 Jun;76(3):602-14. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6941.2011.01069.x. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Fate and efficacy of lacticin 3147-producing Lactococcus lactis in the mammalian 
gastrointestinal tract.

Dobson A(1), Crispie F, Rea MC, O'Sullivan O, Casey PG, Lawlor PG, Cotter PD, 
Ross P, Gardiner GE, Hill C.

Author information:
(1)Teagasc, Food Research Centre Moorepark, Fermoy, Co. Cork, Ireland.

Gastrointestinal survival of the bacteriocin-producing strain, Lactococcus 
lactis DPC6520, was evaluated systematically in vitro and in vivo with a view to 
using this strain to deliver biologically active lacticin 3147, a broad-spectrum 
bacteriocin, to the gut. The activity of the lacticin 3147 producer was also 
evaluated against two clinically relevant pathogens: Clostridium difficile and 
Listeria monocytogenes. When suspended in an appropriate matrix, the lactococcal 
strain is capable of surviving simulated gastrointestinal juices similar to the 
porcine probiotic, Lactobacillus salivarius DPC6005. Upon administration of L. 
lactis DPC6520 to pigs (n=4), excretion rates of ∼10(2) -10(5) CFU g(-1) faeces 
were observed by day 5. Although passage through the gastrointestinal tract 
(GIT) did not affect lacticin 3147 production by L. lactis DPC6520 isolates, 
activity was undetectable in faecal samples by an agar well diffusion assay. 
Furthermore, L. lactis DPC6520 had no inhibitory effect on C. difficile or other 
bacterial populations in a human distal colon model, while lactococcal counts 
declined 10,000-fold over 24 h. The lacticin 3147 producer failed to prevent L. 
monocytogenes infection in a mouse model, even though a mean L. lactis DPC6520 
count of 4.7 × 10(4) CFU g(-1) faeces was obtained over the 5-day administration 
period. These data demonstrate that L. lactis DPC6520 is capable of surviving 
transit through the GIT, and yet lacks antimicrobial efficacy in the models of 
infection used.

© 2011 TEAGASC Food Research Centre. FEMS Microbiology Ecology © 2011 Federation 
of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1574-6941.2011.01069.x
PMID: 21314706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


704. Anaerobe. 2017 Jun;45:86-100. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.03.004. Epub 2017 Mar 
6.

Inhibition of spore germination, growth, and toxin activity of clinically 
relevant C. difficile strains by gut microbiota derived secondary bile acids.

Thanissery R(1), Winston JA(2), Theriot CM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Research Building 424, North Carolina State University, 1060 William 
Moore Drive, Raleigh, NC 27607, United States. Electronic address: 
rthanis@ncsu.edu.
(2)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Research Building 424, North Carolina State University, 1060 William 
Moore Drive, Raleigh, NC 27607, United States. Electronic address: 
jenessa_winston@ncsu.edu.
(3)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Research Building 424, North Carolina State University, 1060 William 
Moore Drive, Raleigh, NC 27607, United States. Electronic address: 
cmtherio@ncsu.edu.

The changing epidemiology of Clostridium difficile infection over the past 
decades presents a significant challenge in the management of C. difficile 
associated diseases. The gastrointestinal tract microbiota provides colonization 
resistance against C. difficile, and growing evidence suggests that gut 
microbial derived secondary bile acids (SBAs) play a role. We hypothesized that 
the C. difficile life cycle; spore germination and outgrowth, growth, and toxin 
production, of strains that vary by age and ribotype will differ in their 
sensitivity to SBAs. C. difficile strains R20291 and CD196 (ribotype 027), M68 
and CF5 (017), 630 (012), BI9 (001) and M120 (078) were used to define 
taurocholate (TCA) mediated spore germination and outgrowth, growth, and toxin 
activity in the absence and presence of gut microbial derived SBAs 
(deoxycholate, isodeoxycholate, lithocholate, isolithocholate, ursodeoxycholate, 
ω-muricholate, and hyodeoxycholate) found in the human and mouse large 
intestine. C. difficile strains varied in their rates of germination, growth 
kinetics, and toxin activity without the addition of SBAs. C. difficile M120, a 
highly divergent strain, had robust germination, growth, but significantly lower 
toxin activity compared to other strains. Many SBAs were able to inhibit TCA 
mediated spore germination and outgrowth, growth, and toxin activity in a dose 
dependent manner, but the level of inhibition and resistance varied across all 
strains and ribotypes. This study illustrates how clinically relevant 
C. difficile strains can have different responses when exposed to SBAs present 
in the gastrointestinal tract.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.03.004
PMCID: PMC5466893
PMID: 28279860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


705. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2012 Jan;28(1):24-9. doi: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e32834c453e.

Gastrointestinal infection as a trigger for inflammatory bowel disease.

Mann EA(1), Saeed SA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. 
Elizabeth.mann@cchmc.org

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: There is accumulating evidence on the importance of microbes 
in the development and maintenance of both the intestinal and immune systems. 
This review focuses on the current findings on the role of gastrointestinal 
pathogens in the cause of chronic inflammatory bowel disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: A number of intestinal pathogens including Mycobacterium avium 
subspecies paratuberculosis, adherent-invasive Escherichia coli, and 
Campylobacter species are associated at fairly high prevalence with Crohn's 
disease, while two recent studies found a low prevalence for cytomegalovirus. In 
a prospective study, M. avium subspecies paratuberculosis detection in early 
Crohn's disease was low and comparable to controls, while much higher in an 
established inflammatory bowel disease cohort. In the pediatric setting, a high 
prevalence of Clostridium difficile was seen in both active and inactive Crohn's 
disease and ulcerative colitis patients. Some studies have speculated that 
Salmonella or Campylobacter infection may increase the risk of inflammatory 
bowel disease on long-term follow-up, but detection bias was found to obscure 
the risk. Recent studies in mouse models have demonstrated that a combination of 
factors, including viral pathogens, genetic susceptibility, and commensal 
microflora, can lead to intestinal pathology.
SUMMARY: No evidence for causation of inflammatory bowel disease by a single 
agent has been found, whereas a number of microbes have been strongly associated 
with the presence of disease. The majority of recent studies support a role for 
the ability of intestinal pathogens to promote chronic inflammation in 
individuals with genetic susceptibility and/or other environmental factors which 
remain to be identified. These factors may include subsets of commensal 
microflora.

DOI: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e32834c453e
PMID: 22080823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


706. Infect Immun. 2019 Jul 23;87(8):e00210-19. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00210-19. Print 2019 
Aug.

Deletion of a 19-Amino-Acid Region in Clostridioides difficile TcdB2 Results in 
Spontaneous Autoprocessing and Reduced Cell Binding and Provides a Nontoxic 
Immunogen for Vaccination.

Bland SJ(1), Larabee JL(1), Shadid TM(1), Lang ML(1), Ballard JD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA jimmy-ballard@ouhsc.edu.

Clostridioides difficile toxin B (TcdB) is an intracellular toxin responsible 
for many of the pathologies of C. difficile infection. The two variant forms of 
TcdB (TcdB1 and TcdB2) share 92% sequence identity but have reported differences 
in rates of cell entry, autoprocessing, and overall toxicity. This 
2,366-amino-acid, multidomain bacterial toxin glucosylates and inactivates small 
GTPases in the cytosol of target cells, ultimately leading to cell death. 
Successful cell entry and intoxication by TcdB are known to involve various 
conformational changes in the protein, including a proteolytic autoprocessing 
event. Previous studies found that amino acids 1753 to 1852 influence the 
conformational states of the proximal carboxy-terminal domain of TcdB and could 
contribute to differences between TcdB1 and TcdB2. In the current study, a 
combination of approaches was used to identify sequences within the region from 
amino acids 1753 to 1852 that influence the conformational integrity and 
cytotoxicity of TcdB2. Four deletion mutants with reduced cytotoxicity were 
identified, while one mutant, TcdB2Δ1769-1787, exhibited no detectable 
cytotoxicity. TcdB2Δ1769-1787 underwent spontaneous autoprocessing and was 
unable to interact with CHO-K1 or HeLa cells, suggesting a potential change in 
the conformation of the mutant protein. Despite the putative alteration in 
structural stability, vaccination with TcdB2Δ1769-1787 induced a 
TcdB2-neutralizing antibody response and protected against C. difficile disease 
in a mouse model. These findings indicate that the 19-amino-acid region spanning 
residues 1769 to 1787 in TcdB2 is crucial to cytotoxicity and the structural 
regulation of autoprocessing and that TcdB2Δ1769-1787 is a promising candidate 
for vaccination.

Copyright © 2019 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/IAI.00210-19
PMCID: PMC6652773
PMID: 31138612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


707. PLoS One. 2015 May 13;10(5):e0126712. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126712. 
eCollection 2015.

Different Dynamic Patterns of β-Lactams, Quinolones, Glycopeptides and 
Macrolides on Mouse Gut Microbial Diversity.

Yin J(1), M P(2), Wang S(2), Liao SX(1), Peng X(2), He Y(2), Chen YR(2), Shen 
HF(2), Su J(3), Chen Y(4), Jiang YX(2), Zhang GX(2), Zhou HW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China 510515.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Department of Environmental 
Health, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China 510515.
(3)Department of respiration, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China 510515.
(4)Department of Digestive Diseases, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, China 510515.

The adverse impact of antibiotics on the gut microbiota has attracted extensive 
interest, particularly due to the development of microbiome research techniques 
in recent years. However, a direct comparison of the dynamic effects of various 
types of antibiotics using the same animal model has not been available. In the 
present study, we selected six antibiotics from four categories with the 
broadest clinical usage, namely, β-lactams (Ceftriaxone Sodium, 
Cefoperazone/Sulbactam and meropenem), quinolones (ofloxacin), glycopeptides 
(vancomycin), and macrolides (azithromycin), to treat BALB/c mice. Stool samples 
were collected during and after the administration of antibiotics, and microbial 
diversity was analyzed through Illumina sequencing and bioinformatics analyses 
using QIIME. Both α and β diversity analyses showed that ceftriaxone sodium, 
cefoperazone/sulbactam, meropenem and vancomycin changed the gut microbiota 
dramatically by the second day of antibiotic administration whereas the 
influence of ofloxacin was trivial. Azithromycin clearly changed the gut 
microbiota but much less than vancomycin and the β-lactams. In general, the 
community changes induced by the three β-lactam antibiotics showed consistency 
in inhibiting Papillibacter, Prevotella and Alistipes while inducing massive 
growth of Clostridium. The low diversity and high Clostridium level might be an 
important cause of Clostridium difficile infection after usage of β-lactams. 
Vancomycin was unique in that it inhibited Firmicutes, mainly the genus 
Clostridium. On the other hand, it induced the growth of Escherichia and effect 
lasted for months afterward. Azithromycin and meropenem induced the growth of 
Enterococcus. These findings will be useful for understanding the potential 
adverse effects of antibiotics on the gut microbiome and ensuring their better 
usage.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126712
PMCID: PMC4430517
PMID: 25970622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


708. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2017 Jul 25;61(8):e00477-17. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.00477-17. Print 2017 Aug.

Targeted Metabolomics Analysis Identifies Intestinal Microbiota-Derived Urinary 
Biomarkers of Colonization Resistance in Antibiotic-Treated Mice.

Obrenovich ME(1)(2)(3), Tima M(1), Polinkovsky A(1), Zhang R(4), Emancipator 
SN(2)(5), Donskey CJ(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Research Service, Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(2)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Service, Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Cleveland State University, Department of Chemistry, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Mass Spectrometry II Core Lab, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(5)Case Western Reserve University, Department of Pathology, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(6)Research Service, Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA curtisd123@yahoo.com.
(7)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Cleveland Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Antibiotics excreted into the intestinal tract may disrupt the microbiota that 
provide colonization resistance against enteric pathogens and alter normal 
metabolic functions of the microbiota. Many of the bacterial metabolites 
produced in the intestinal tract are absorbed systemically and excreted in 
urine. Here, we used a mouse model to test the hypothesis that alterations in 
levels of targeted bacterial metabolites in urine specimens could provide useful 
biomarkers indicating disrupted or intact colonization resistance. To assess in 
vivo colonization resistance, mice were challenged with Clostridium difficile 
spores orally 3, 6, and 11 days after the completion of 2 days of treatment with 
piperacillin-tazobactam, aztreonam, or saline. For concurrent groups of 
antibiotic-treated mice, urine samples were analyzed by using liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to quantify the 
concentrations of 11 compounds targeted as potential biomarkers of colonization 
resistance. Aztreonam did not affect colonization resistance, whereas 
piperacillin-tazobactam disrupted colonization resistance 3 days after 
piperacillin-tazobactam treatment, with complete recovery by 11 days after 
treatment. Three of the 11 compounds exhibited a statistically significant and 
>10-fold increase (the tryptophan metabolite N-acetyltryptophan) or decrease 
(the plant polyphenyl derivatives cinnamoylglycine and enterodiol) in 
concentrations in urine 3 days after piperacillin-tazobactam treatment, followed 
by recovery to baseline that coincided with the restoration of in vivo 
colonization resistance. These urinary metabolites could provide useful and 
easily accessible biomarkers indicating intact or disrupted colonization 
resistance during and after antibiotic treatment.

Copyright © 2017 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00477-17
PMCID: PMC5527637
PMID: 28584146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


709. Biochem Pharmacol. 1997 Nov 15;54(10):1097-108. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-2952(97)00314-6.

Evidence for differential roles of the Rho subfamily of GTP-binding proteins in 
glucose- and calcium-induced insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells.

Kowluru A(1), Li G, Rabaglia ME, Segu VB, Hofmann F, Aktories K, Metz SA.

Author information:
(1)Medical and Research Services, William S. Middleton Memorial VA Medical 
Center, Madison, WI 53705, USA. akowluru@facstaff.wisc.edu

We utilized clostridial toxins (with known specificities for inhibition of 
GTPases) to ascertain the contribution of candidate GTPases in physiologic 
insulin secretion from beta cells. Exposure of normal rat islets or isolated 
beta (HIT-T15) cells to Clostridium difficile toxins A and B catalyzed the 
glucosylation (and thereby the inactivation) of Rac, Cdc42, and Rho endogenous 
to beta cells; concomitantly, either toxin reduced glucose- or potassium-induced 
insulin secretion from rat islets and HIT cells. Treatment of beta cells with 
Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin (LT; which modified only Ras, Rap, and Rac) 
also reduced glucose- or potassium-induced secretion. However, clostridial toxin 
C3-exoenzyme (which ADP-ribosylates and inactivates only Rho) was without any 
effect on either glucose- or potassium-induced insulin secretion. These data 
suggest that Cdc42, Rac, Ras, and/or Rap (but not Rho) may be needed for 
glucose- or potassium-mediated secretion. The effects of these toxins appear to 
be specific on stimulus-secretion coupling, since no difference in metabolic 
viability (assessed colorimetrically by quantitating the conversion of the 
tetrazolium salt into a formazan in a reduction reaction driven by nutrient 
metabolism) was demonstrable between control and toxin (A or LT)-treated beta 
cells. Toxin (A or LT) treatment also did not alter glucose- or 
potassium-mediated rises in cytosolic free calcium concentrations ([Ca2+]i), 
suggesting that these GTPases are involved in steps distal to elevations in 
[Ca2+]i. Recent findings indicate that the carboxyl methylation of Cdc42 is 
stimulated by only glucose, whereas that of Rap (Kowluru et al., J Clin Invest 
98: 540-555, 1996) and Rac (present study) are regulated by glucose or 
potassium. Together, these findings provide direct evidence, for the first time, 
that the Rho subfamily of GTPases plays a key regulatory role(s) in insulin 
secretion, and they suggest that Cdc42 may be required for early steps in 
glucose stimulation of insulin release, whereas Rap and/or Rac may be required 
for a later step(s) in the stimulus-secretion coupling cascade (i.e. 
Ca2+-induced exocytosis of insulin).

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-2952(97)00314-6
PMID: 9464452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


710. mBio. 2014 Oct 14;5(5):e01933-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01933-14.

Detection of zoonotic pathogens and characterization of novel viruses carried by 
commensal Rattus norvegicus in New York City.

Firth C(1), Bhat M(2), Firth MA(3), Williams SH(2), Frye MJ(4), Simmonds P(5), 
Conte JM(2), Ng J(2), Garcia J(2), Bhuva NP(2), Lee B(2), Che X(2), Quan PL(2), 
Lipkin WI(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, New York, New York, USA cadhla.firth@csiro.au.
(2)Center for Infection and Immunity, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New 
York, USA.
(4)New York State Integrated Pest Management Program, Cornell University, 
Elmsford, New York, USA.
(5)University of Edinburgh, Centre for Immunology, Infection and Evolution, 
Ashworth Laboratories, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) are globally distributed and concentrate in 
urban environments, where they live and feed in closer proximity to human 
populations than most other mammals. Despite the potential role of rats as 
reservoirs of zoonotic diseases, the microbial diversity present in urban rat 
populations remains unexplored. In this study, we used targeted molecular assays 
to detect known bacterial, viral, and protozoan human pathogens and unbiased 
high-throughput sequencing to identify novel viruses related to agents of human 
disease in commensal Norway rats in New York City. We found that these rats are 
infected with bacterial pathogens known to cause acute or mild gastroenteritis 
in people, including atypical enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, Clostridium 
difficile, and Salmonella enterica, as well as infectious agents that have been 
associated with undifferentiated febrile illnesses, including Bartonella spp., 
Streptobacillus moniliformis, Leptospira interrogans, and Seoul hantavirus. We 
also identified a wide range of known and novel viruses from groups that contain 
important human pathogens, including sapoviruses, cardioviruses, kobuviruses, 
parechoviruses, rotaviruses, and hepaciviruses. The two novel hepaciviruses 
discovered in this study replicate in the liver of Norway rats and may have 
utility in establishing a small animal model of human hepatitis C virus 
infection. The results of this study demonstrate the diversity of microbes 
carried by commensal rodent species and highlight the need for improved pathogen 
surveillance and disease monitoring in urban environments. Importance: The 
observation that most emerging infectious diseases of humans originate in animal 
reservoirs has led to wide-scale microbial surveillance and discovery programs 
in wildlife, particularly in the developing world. Strikingly, less attention 
has been focused on commensal animals like rats, despite their abundance in 
urban centers and close proximity to human populations. To begin to explore the 
zoonotic disease risk posed by urban rat populations, we trapped and surveyed 
Norway rats collected in New York City over a 1-year period. This analysis 
revealed a striking diversity of known pathogens and novel viruses in our study 
population, including multiple agents associated with acute gastroenteritis or 
febrile illnesses in people. Our findings indicate that urban rats are 
reservoirs for a vast diversity of microbes that may affect human health and 
indicate a need for increased surveillance and awareness of the disease risks 
associated with urban rodent infestation.

Copyright © 2014 Firth et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.01933-14
PMCID: PMC4205793
PMID: 25316698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


711. J Immunol. 1989 Sep 15;143(6):1777-83.

Origin and fate of IgE-bearing lymphocytes. II. Modulation of IgE isotype 
expression on Peyer's patch cells by feeding with certain bacteria and bacterial 
cell wall components or by thymectomy.

Durkin HG(1), Chice SM, Gaetjens E, Bazin H, Tarcsay L, Dukor P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York Health Science Center, 
Brooklyn 11203.

Mechanisms regulating the appearance of sIgE+ B lymphocytes appear to be lacking 
in adult germfree (GF) rats in that their Peyer's patches (PP) contain high 
numbers of cells with sIgE (approximately 15% of total cells), one-half of which 
simultaneously express sIgA, whereas sIgE+ cells are absent from PP of 
conventional rats (less than 1%). GF rat PP also contain elevated numbers of 
sIgA+ cells and decreased numbers of sIgM+ cells, with elevated numbers of 
sThy-1+ RT 7.1+ Ig- T cells, and reduced numbers of sThy-1- RT 7.1+ Ig- T cells. 
The cellular composition of PP of GF rats was converted to that resembling a 
conventional rat within 18 h after either 1) use of standard (unautoclaved) 
food; 2) feeding with certain bacteria (Clostridium difficile, Corynebacterium 
pseudodiphtheriticum, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Klebsiella pneumoniae), in 
either live or heat-killed, but not autoclaved form; or with certain bacterial 
cell wall components: murein (peptidoglycan), and its synthetic derivatives, 
muramyltripeptide phosphatidylethanolamine and desmethyl-muramyldipeptide, but 
not with LPS, core lipid A or lipoprotein; there was no effect if any bacterial 
cell wall component was injected i.v.; or 3) thymectomy. Each procedure resulted 
in elimination of sIgE+ B cells and normalization of the other surface isotypes, 
and loss of sThy-1+ RT 7.1+ Ig- T cells and normalization of sThy-1- RT 7.1+ Ig- 
T cells. Irrespective of treatment, no sIgE+ cells were detected in bone marrow, 
thymus, other lymphoid organs or blood, excluding the possibility that the 
elimination of these cells from PP was associated with their redistribution to 
other sites. Thus, exposure to gut flora and bacterial peptidoglycan components 
may have resulted in IgE isotype switching, either directly or through the 
mediation of accessory and/or sThy-1+ RT 7.1+ regulatory T cells. The sites in 
which sIgE+ B cells are down-regulated appear to be PP.

PMID: 2789249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


712. EMBO J. 1998 Nov 2;17(21):6219-29. doi: 10.1093/emboj/17.21.6219.

Fc receptor-mediated phagocytosis requires CDC42 and Rac1.

Massol P(1), Montcourrier P, Guillemot JC, Chavrier P.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Immunologie INSERM-CNRS de Marseille-Luminy, Case 906, 13288 
Marseille Cedex 9, France.

At the surface of phagocytes, antibody-opsonized particles are recognized by 
surface receptors for the Fc portion of immunoglobulins (FcRs) that mediate 
their capture by an actin-driven process called phagocytosis which is poorly 
defined. We have analyzed the function of the Rho proteins Rac1 and CDC42 in the 
high affinity receptor for IgE (FcepsilonRI)-mediated phagocytosis using 
transfected rat basophil leukemia (RBL-2H3) mast cells expressing dominant 
inhibitory forms of CDC42 and Rac1. Binding of opsonized particles to 
untransfected RBL-2H3 cells led to the accumulation of F-actin at the site of 
contact with the particles and further, to particle internalization. This 
process was inhibited by Clostridium difficile toxin B, a general inhibitor of 
Rho GTP-binding proteins. Dominant inhibition of Rac1 or CDC42 function severely 
inhibited particle internalization but not F-actin accumulation. Inhibition of 
CDC42 function resulted in the appearance of pedestal-like structures with 
particles at their tips, while particles bound at the surface of the Rac1 mutant 
cell line were enclosed within thin membrane protrusions that did not fuse. 
These phenotypic differences indicate that Rac1 and CDC42 have distinct 
functions and may act cooperatively in the assembly of the phagocytic cup. 
Inhibition of phagocytosis in the mutant cell lines was accompanied by the 
persistence of tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins around bound particles. 
Phagocytic cup closure and particle internalization were also blocked when 
phosphotyrosine dephosphorylation was inhibited by treatment of RBL-2H3 cells 
with phenylarsine oxide, an inhibitor of protein phosphotyrosine phosphatases. 
Altogether, our data show that Rac1 and CDC42 are required to coordinate actin 
filament organization and membrane extension to form phagocytic cups and to 
allow particle internalization during FcR-mediated phagocytosis. Our data also 
suggest that Rac1 and CDC42 are involved in phosphotyrosine dephosphorylation 
required for particle internalization.

DOI: 10.1093/emboj/17.21.6219
PMCID: PMC1170948
PMID: 9799231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


713. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Apr;34(4):441-53. doi: 10.1006/jmcc.2002.1525.

Distinct signaling pathways mediate cardiomyocyte phospholipase D stimulation by 
endothelin-1 and thrombin.

Fahimi-Vahid M(1), Gosau N, Michalek C, Han L, Jakobs KH, Schmidt M, Roberts N, 
Avkiran M, Wieland T.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Several G protein-coupled receptors which stimulate phospholipase C (PLC) also 
activate phospholipase D (PLD) in cardiomyocytes. Here, we characterized PLD 
activation in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes by the PLC-stimulatory thrombin 
receptor PAR1, in comparison to the endothelin-1 receptor ET(A)R, which induces 
PLD stimulation by activation of protein kinase C (PKC) delta and epsilon. 
Similar to ET(A)R, activation of PAR1 induced PLD stimulation, which, however, 
was insensitive to PKC inhibition. Furthermore, in contrast to ET(A)R, PLD 
stimulation by PAR1 was suppressed by overexpression of regulators of G protein 
signaling specific for G(12)-type G proteins and treatment with brefeldin A, an 
inhibitor of guanine nucleotide exchange factors for ADP-ribosylation factor 
(ARF) GTPases. On the other hand, inactivation of Rho GTPases by Clostridium 
difficile toxin B and treatment with general tyrosine kinase inhibitors 
suppressed PAR1- and ET(A)R- as well as phorbol ester-induced PLD stimulation 
and was associated with a fall in the cellular level of phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate (PIP(2)). We conclude that, in contrast to ET(A)R-PLD coupling, 
PAR1-induced cardiomyocyte PLD stimulation is PKC-independent and mediated by 
G(12)-type G proteins and ARF GTPases, while Rho and tyrosine kinases regulate 
PLD stimulation by either receptor, apparently by controlling the cellular level 
of PIP(2), a common regulator of PLD activity.

Copyright 2002 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/jmcc.2002.1525
PMID: 11991733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


714. J Exp Med. 1968 Dec 1;128(6):1339-52. doi: 10.1084/jem.128.6.1339.

Immunological studies in ulcerative colitis. IV. Origin of autoantibodies.

Lagercrantz R, Hammarström S, Perlmann P, Gustafsson BE.

The incidence and height of antibody titers to colon, assayed by indirect 
hemagglutination with a heat stable colon extract from germ free rats, is 
significantly higher in sera from patients with ulcerative colitis than in those 
from healthy controls or from patients with amebic liver abscess or dysentery. 
While sera from ulcerative colitis patients and controls are indistinguishable 
in regard to incidence and height of antibody titers to Forsman antigen, 
Staphylococcus aureus S 209, Clostridium difficile, and several common strains 
of E. coli, they have elevated titers and increased incidence of antibodies to a 
heat stable antigen of E. coli O14. Patients with amebic dysentery have normal 
titers of such antibodies. Absorption of patients' sera with E. coli O14 antigen 
inhibits the colon directed hemagglutination reaction in approximately 30% of 
the cases tested. Likewise, the anti-E. coli O14 reaction can sometimes be 
inhibited with the colon extract. Other E. coli strains and other bacteria are 
inactive or have only weak inhibitory activity. Hemagglutination inhibition 
experiments show that germ free rat colon and E. coli O14 contain common 
structures, depicted by antibodies in the patients' sera. This pattern of 
reactivity closely resembles that seen in rats made autoimmune to colon by 
injection of newborn rabbit colon. E. coli O14 is known to carry a heterogenetic 
antigen present in lower concentration (or activity) in most Enterobacteriaceae. 
Hemagglutination inhibition experiments with rabbit antisera to E. coli O14 
suggest that the antigen common for E. coli O14 and colon is related to this 
heterogenetic antigen. The findings imply that this antigen, which is constantly 
present in low concentrations in the human colon, may give rise to anticolon 
antibody formation in ulcerative colitis through breakage of tolerance. Since 
this antigen is present in healthy individuals as well, additional factors are 
required to explain the induction of anti-colon autoimmunity in ulcerative 
colitis.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.128.6.1339
PMCID: PMC2138583
PMID: 4879999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


715. J Anim Sci. 2018 Apr 3;96(3):1017-1031. doi: 10.1093/jas/skx034.

Effects of spray-dried porcine plasma on fecal microbiota in nursery pigs.

Tran H(1), Anderson CL(1), Bundy JW(1), Fernando SC(1), Miller PS(1), Burkey 
TE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.

Spray-dried porcine plasma (SDPP) has been considered as an alternative for 
in-feed antibiotics to improve pig growth performance; however, the effect of 
SDPP on gut microbiota is unknown. The objective of this study was to evaluate 
effects of feeding SDPP on fecal microbial communities of nursery pigs. 
Ninety-six weaned pigs were assigned to 16 pens, which were allotted to two 
dietary treatments, including the control or the control + SDPP (5% and 2.5% 
SDPP inclusion in phase 1 and 2, respectively) diet. Fecal samples were 
collected at d 0, 7, 14, 21, and 28. Multiplex sequencing of V3 region of the 
16S rRNA gene was used to characterize the bacterial community structure of 
fecal samples. Pearson's correlation tests were performed in Calypso to identify 
bacterial taxa that were either positively or negatively associated with overall 
growth performance. Feeding SDPP altered microbial structure at family, genus, 
and operational taxonomic unit (OTU) classifications; however, fecal microbes 
shifted with time. At the family level, Clostridiaceae increased (P < 0.001) on 
d 14, but decreased (P < 0.05) on d 28 in SDPP-fed pigs compared with control 
pigs. Decreased Veillonellaceae (P < 0.05; d 14) and Lachnospiraceae (P = 0.001; 
overall) were observed in SDPP-fed pigs compared with control pigs. Feeding SDPP 
increased lactic acid-producing bacteria (Lactobacillus delbrueckii, d 7) and 
cellulolytic bacteria (Ruminococcus albus, d 7; Clostridium thermocellum, d 7 
and 14; and Clostridium saccharoperbutylacetonicum/beijerinckii, d 14; and 
Megasphaera elsdenii, d 21). On d 28, feeding SDPP decreased (P < 0.05) 
Clostridium difficile compared with control pigs. In conclusion, feeding SDPP 
altered fecal microbial communities in nursery pigs. The results of this study 
may provide information to help explain the positive effects associated with 
feeding SDPP on nutrient digestibility and gut health of nursery pigs.

DOI: 10.1093/jas/skx034
PMCID: PMC6093563
PMID: 29385463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


716. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 May 2;147(1):259-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.02.026. Epub 
2013 Mar 1.

Antibacterial and cytotoxic activity of isoprenylated coumarin mammea A/AA 
isolated from Mammea africana.

Canning C(1), Sun S, Ji X, Gupta S, Zhou K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 
48202, USA.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The stem bark of Mammea africana is widely 
distributed in tropical Africa and commonly used in traditional medicine. This 
study aims to identify the active compound in Mammea africana and to evaluate 
its antimicrobial and antiproliferative activity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methanol extract from the bark of the Mammea africana was 
separated by liquid-liquid extraction, followed by open column chromatography. A 
principal antimicrobial compound was purified by high performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) and its structure was elucidated by nuclear magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (NMR) and mass spectrometry (MS). The antibacterial 
activity of the purified compound was determined using the broth microdilution 
method against 7 common pathogenic bacteria. The compound was also evaluated for 
cytotoxicity by cell proliferation assay (MTS) using the mouse embryonic 
fibroblast cell line NIH 3T3 and the non-small cell lung cancer cell line A549.
RESULTS: The purified active compound was determined to be mammea A/AA and was 
found to be highly active against Campylobacter jejuni (MIC=0.5 μg/ml), 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (MIC=0.25 μg/ml), and Clostridium difficile (MIC=0.25 
μg/ml). The compound exhibited significant antiproliferative activities against 
both NIH 3T3 and A549 cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Mammea A/AA isolated from Mammea africana exerts specific inhibitory 
activity against Campylobacter jejuni, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and 
Campylobacter difficile. Mammea A/AA was also found to exhibit significant 
cytotoxicity against both cancer and normal cell lines.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.02.026
PMID: 23466248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


717. Magn Reson Chem. 2009 Dec;47 Suppl 1:S36-46. doi: 10.1002/mrc.2511.

NMR-based metabonomics analysis of mouse urine and fecal extracts following oral 
treatment with the broad-spectrum antibiotic enrofloxacin (Baytril).

Romick-Rosendale LE(1), Goodpaster AM, Hanwright PJ, Patel NB, Wheeler ET, Chona 
DL, Kennedy MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Miami University, Oxford, OH, USA.

The human gastrointestinal tract is home to hundreds of species of bacteria and 
the balance between beneficial and pathogenic bacteria plays a critical role in 
human health and disease. The human infant, however, is born with a sterile gut 
and the complex gastrointestinal host/bacterial ecosystem is only established 
after birth by rapid bacterial colonization. Composition of newborn gut flora 
depends on several factors including type of birth (Ceasarian or natural), 
manner of early feeding (breast milk or formula), and exposure to local, 
physical environment. Imbalance in normal, healthy gut flora contributes to 
several adult human diseases including inflammatory bowel (ulcerative colitis 
and Crohn's disease) and Clostridium difficile associated disease, and early 
childhood diseases such as necrotizing enterocolitis. As a first step towards 
characterization of the role of gut bacteria in human health and disease, we 
conducted an 850 MHz (1)H nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy study to 
monitor changes in metabolic profiles of urine and fecal extracts of 15 mice 
following gut sterilization by the broad-spectrum antibiotic enrofloxacin (also 
known as Baytril). Ten metabolites changed in urine following enrofloxacin 
treatment including decreased acetate due to loss of microbial catabolism of 
sugars and polysaccharides, decreased trimethylamine-N-oxide due to loss of 
microbial catabolism of choline, and increased creatine and creatinine due to 
loss of microbial enzyme degradation. Eight metabolites changed in fecal 
extracts of mice treated with enrofloxacin including depletion of amino acids 
produced by microbial proteases, reduction in metabolites generated by 
lactate-utilizing bacteria, and increased urea caused by loss of microbial 
ureases.

DOI: 10.1002/mrc.2511
PMID: 19768747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


718. Viruses. 2018 Sep 23;10(10):518. doi: 10.3390/v10100518.

Mouse Gamma Herpesvirus MHV-68 Induces Severe Gastrointestinal (GI) Dilatation 
in Interferon Gamma Receptor-Deficient Mice (IFNγR(-/-)) That Is Blocked by 
Interleukin-10.

Chen H(1), Bartee MY(2), Yaron JR(3), Liu L(4), Zhang L(5), Zheng D(6), Hogue 
IB(7), Bullard WL(8), Tibbetts S(9), Lucas AR(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Cardiovascular Medicine and 
Rheumatology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0277, USA. 
chenhao3996913@163.com.
(2)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Cardiovascular Medicine and 
Rheumatology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0277, USA. 
barteem@musc.edu.
(3)Centers for Personalized Diagnostics and Immunotherapy, Vaccines and 
Virotherapy, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 
85287-6401, USA. jyaron@asu.edu.
(4)Department of Surgery, BIDMC, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
liuliying2004@hotmail.com.
(5)Centers for Personalized Diagnostics and Immunotherapy, Vaccines and 
Virotherapy, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 
85287-6401, USA. liqiang.zhang@asu.edu.
(6)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Cardiovascular Medicine and 
Rheumatology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0277, USA. 
dhzheng@yahoo.com.
(7)Centers for Personalized Diagnostics and Immunotherapy, Vaccines and 
Virotherapy, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 
85287-6401, USA. ihogue@asu.edu.
(8)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. wbullard@ufl.edu.
(9)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. stibbe@ufl.edu.
(10)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Cardiovascular Medicine and 
Rheumatology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610-0277, USA. 
arlucas5@asu.edu.
(11)Centers for Personalized Diagnostics and Immunotherapy, Vaccines and 
Virotherapy, Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 
85287-6401, USA. arlucas5@asu.edu.
(12)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. arlucas5@asu.edu.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and Clostridium difficile infection cause 
gastrointestinal (GI) distension and, in severe cases, toxic megacolon with risk 
of perforation and death. Herpesviruses have been linked to severe GI 
dilatation. MHV-68 is a model for human gamma herpesvirus infection inducing GI 
dilatation in interleukin-10 (IL-10)-deficient mice but is benign in wildtype 
mice. MHV-68 also causes lethal vasculitis and pulmonary hemorrhage in 
interferon gamma receptor-deficient (IFNγR-/-) mice, but GI dilatation has not 
been reported. In prior work the Myxomavirus-derived anti-inflammatory serpin, 
Serp-1, improved survival, reducing vasculitis and pulmonary hemorrhage in 
MHV-68-infected IFNγR-/- mice with significantly increased IL-10. IL-10 has been 
investigated as treatment for GI dilatation with variable efficacy. We report 
here that MHV-68 infection produces severe GI dilatation with inflammation and 
gut wall degradation in 28% of INFγR-/- mice. Macrophage invasion and smooth 
muscle degradation were accompanied by decreased concentrations of T helper 
(Th2), B, monocyte, and dendritic cells. Plasma and spleen IL-10 were 
significantly reduced in mice with GI dilatation, while interleukin-1 beta 
(IL-1β), IL-6, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) and INFγ increased. Treatment 
of gamma herpesvirus-infected mice with exogenous IL-10 prevents severe GI 
inflammation and dilatation, suggesting benefit for herpesvirus-induced 
dilatation.

DOI: 10.3390/v10100518
PMCID: PMC6213885
PMID: 30249047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no current conflict of 
interest. Lucas was chief medical officer for Viron Therapeutics, Inc., but this 
small company has closed. Lucas holds patents on virus-derived immune modulating 
proteins and peptides but has no patents on IL-10 and has no financial interest 
in these reagents.


719. J Nutr. 2009 Oct;139(10):1848-54. doi: 10.3945/jn.109.108613. Epub 2009 Aug 12.

Bacillus polyfermenticus ameliorates colonic inflammation by promoting 
cytoprotective effects in colitic mice.

Im E(1), Choi YJ, Pothoulakis C, Rhee SH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, David Geffen School of Medicine, University 
of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Although human consumption of Bacillus polyfermenticus provides several health 
benefits, the probiotic effect of this bacterium against colonic inflammation 
has not yet, to our knowledge, been studied. Therefore, we induced colitis in 
mice by oral or intrarectal administration of dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) or 
trinitrobenzenosulfonic acid (TNBS), respectively, and investigated the effect 
of B. polyfermenticus on colitis. We found that mice treated with DSS or TNBS 
along with B. polyfermenticus had reduced mortality and severity of colitis 
(weight loss, diarrhea, and mucosal damages) than mice treated with DSS or TNBS 
alone. B. polyfermenticus also reduced the expression of inflammatory molecules, 
including chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1, intercellular adhesion molecule, and 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha, but enhanced the expression of the antiinflammatory 
cytokine interleukin-10 in the inflamed mouse colon. Moreover, B. 
polyfermenticus suppressed apoptosis both in vivo in inflamed colonic mucosa and 
in vitro in colonic epithelial cells stimulated with apoptosis-inducing agents 
(FasL or Clostridium difficile Toxin A) when the apoptotic response was 
determined by a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling 
assay and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase or caspase-3, respectively. 
Treating colonic epithelial cells with B. polyfermenticus-conditioned medium 
(BPCM) enhanced cell proliferation and induced the phosphoinositide 
3-kinases/Akt signaling pathway, suggesting that this bacterium can promote 
epithelial cell proliferation. BPCM also promoted the migration of colonic 
epithelial cells. These data suggest that B. polyfermenticus ameliorates colonic 
inflammation by suppressing apoptosis and promoting epithelial cell 
proliferation and migration.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.109.108613
PMCID: PMC2744608
PMID: 19675103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


720. mSphere. 2020 Oct 21;5(5):e00869-20. doi: 10.1128/mSphere.00869-20.

The Initial Gut Microbiota and Response to Antibiotic Perturbation Influence 
Clostridioides difficile Clearance in Mice.

Tomkovich S(1), Stough JMA(1), Bishop L(1), Schloss PD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA pschloss@umich.edu.

The gut microbiota has a key role in determining susceptibility to 
Clostridioides difficile infections (CDIs). However, much of the mechanistic 
work examining CDIs in mouse models uses animals obtained from a single source. 
We treated mice from 6 sources (2 University of Michigan colonies and 4 
commercial vendors) with clindamycin, followed by a C. difficile challenge, and 
then measured C. difficile colonization levels throughout the infection. The 
microbiota were profiled via 16S rRNA gene sequencing to examine the variation 
across sources and alterations due to clindamycin treatment and C. difficile 
challenge. While all mice were colonized 1 day postinfection, variation emerged 
from days 3 to 7 postinfection with animals from some sources colonized with C. 
difficile for longer and at higher levels. We identified bacteria that varied in 
relative abundance across sources and throughout the experiment. Some bacteria 
were consistently impacted by clindamycin treatment in all sources of mice, 
including Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae, and Enterobacteriaceae To identify 
bacteria that were most important to colonization regardless of the source, we 
created logistic regression models that successfully classified mice based on 
whether they cleared C. difficile by 7 days postinfection using community 
composition data at baseline, post-clindamycin treatment, and 1 day 
postinfection. With these models, we identified 4 bacterial taxa that were 
predictive of whether C. difficile cleared. They varied across sources 
(Bacteroides) or were altered by clindamycin (Porphyromonadaceae) or both 
(Enterobacteriaceae and Enterococcus). Allowing for microbiota variation across 
sources better emulates human interindividual variation and can help identify 
bacterial drivers of phenotypic variation in the context of CDIs.IMPORTANCE 
Clostridioides difficile is a leading nosocomial infection. Although 
perturbation to the gut microbiota is an established risk, there is variation in 
who becomes asymptomatically colonized, develops an infection, or has adverse 
infection outcomes. Mouse models of C. difficile infection (CDI) are widely used 
to answer a variety of C. difficile pathogenesis questions. However, the 
interindividual variation between mice from the same breeding facility is less 
than what is observed in humans. Therefore, we challenged mice from 6 different 
breeding colonies with C. difficile We found that the starting microbial 
community structures and C. difficile persistence varied by the source of mice. 
Interestingly, a subset of the bacteria that varied across sources were 
associated with how long C. difficile was able to colonize. By increasing the 
interindividual diversity of the starting communities, we were able to better 
model human diversity. This provided a more nuanced perspective of C. difficile 
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2020 Tomkovich et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mSphere.00869-20
PMCID: PMC7580958
PMID: 33087520


721. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 11;287(20):16835-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.302166. Epub 
2012 Feb 29.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription-5 mediates neuronal apoptosis 
induced by inhibition of Rac GTPase activity.

Stankiewicz TR(1), Loucks FA, Schroeder EK, Nevalainen MT, Tyler KL, Aktories K, 
Bouchard RJ, Linseman DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, University 
of Denver, Denver, Colorado 80208, USA.

In several neuronal cell types, the small GTPase Rac is essential for survival. 
We have shown previously that the Rho family GTPase inhibitor Clostridium 
difficile toxin B (ToxB) induces apoptosis in primary rat cerebellar granule 
neurons (CGNs) principally via inhibition of Rac GTPase function. In the present 
study, incubation with ToxB activated a proapoptotic Janus kinase (JAK)/signal 
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway, and a pan-JAK 
inhibitor protected CGNs from Rac inhibition. STAT1 expression was induced by 
ToxB; however, CGNs from STAT1 knock-out mice succumbed to ToxB-induced 
apoptosis as readily as wild-type CGNs. STAT3 displayed enhanced tyrosine 
phosphorylation following treatment with ToxB, and a reputed inhibitor of STAT3, 
cucurbitacin (JSI-124), reduced CGN apoptosis. Unexpectedly, JSI-124 failed to 
block STAT3 phosphorylation, and CGNs were not protected from ToxB by other 
known STAT3 inhibitors. In contrast, STAT5A tyrosine phosphorylation induced by 
ToxB was suppressed by JSI-124. In addition, roscovitine similarly inhibited 
STAT5A phosphorylation and protected CGNs from ToxB-induced apoptosis. 
Consistent with these results, adenoviral infection with a dominant negative 
STAT5 mutant, but not wild-type STAT5, significantly decreased ToxB-induced 
apoptosis of CGNs. Finally, chromatin immunoprecipitation with a STAT5 antibody 
revealed increased STAT5 binding to the promoter region of prosurvival Bcl-xL. 
STAT5 was recruited to the Bcl-xL promoter region in a ToxB-dependent manner, 
and this DNA binding preceded Bcl-xL down-regulation, suggesting transcriptional 
repression. These data indicate that a novel JAK/STAT5 proapoptotic pathway 
significantly contributes to neuronal apoptosis induced by the inhibition of Rac 
GTPase.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.302166
PMCID: PMC3351344
PMID: 22378792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


722. Pediatr Res. 1994 Oct;36(4):522-7. doi: 10.1203/00006450-199410000-00019.

Saccharomyces boulardii enhances rat intestinal enzyme expression by endoluminal 
release of polyamines.

Buts JP(1), De Keyser N, De Raedemaeker L.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Research, Faculty of Medicine, Catholic University of 
Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Saccharomyces boulardii is a yeast widely used in humans for the prevention and 
treatment of infectious enteritis and Clostridium difficile-associated 
enterocolopathies. After oral administration to human volunteers or growing 
rats, S. boulardii enhances markedly the expression of intestinal enzymes as 
well as the production of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor by mechanisms 
that remain unknown. We have analyzed the role of the yeast polyamines as 
potential mediators in the intestinal trophic response. In weanling rats (d 20 
to d 30), a daily dose of 100 mg of lyophilized S. boulardii produced 
significant (p < 0.025) increases in sucrase (157%) and maltase (47%) 
activities. This dose corresponded to a total oral load of 678 nmol of 
polyamines per day (spermidine; 376 +/- 32, spermine: 293 +/- 26, putrescine: 
9.5 +/- 1.4 nmol/100 mg). Spermine, given orally to growing rats at doses nearly 
equivalent (500 nmol) to the load of polyamines provided by the yeast (678 
nmol), reproduced similar enzymatic changes, including a 2.5-fold induction of 
sucrase, and enhanced maltase activity (+24%). Spermidine and spermine 
concentrations measured in the jejunal mucosa of treated rats were increased 
over matched controls by 21.4% (p < 0.005) and 21.9%, respectively (p < 0.002). 
After being centrifuged and filtered to discard residual yeast cells, 2-mL 
samples of jejunal and ileal fluid collected from S. boulardii-treated rats by 
intestinal flushing contained higher levels of spermidine (48 and 60%) and 
spermine (150 and 316%) than did control rats. Our data indicate that 
lyophilized S. boulardii exerts trophic effects on the small intestine that are 
likely mediated by the endoluminal release of spermine and spermidine.

DOI: 10.1203/00006450-199410000-00019
PMID: 7816529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


723. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2016 May 23;60(6):3333-9. doi: 
10.1128/AAC.02904-15. Print 2016 Jun.

Effect of Surotomycin, a Novel Cyclic Lipopeptide Antibiotic, on Intestinal 
Colonization with Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci and Klebsiella pneumoniae in 
Mice.

Deshpande A(1), Hurless K(2), Cadnum JL(2), Chesnel L(3), Gao L(3), Chan L(4), 
Kundrapu S(2), Polinkovsky A(2), Donskey CJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Medicine Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, Ohio, USA Department of Infectious Diseases, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey, USA.
(4)Second Genome, Inc., San Bruno, California, USA.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Case Western Reserve University School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical 
Center, Cleveland VA Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, USA curtisd123@yahoo.com.

Surotomycin (formerly called CB-183,315) is a novel, orally administered cyclic 
lipopeptide antibacterial in development for the treatment of Clostridium 
difficile infection (CDI) that has potent activity against vancomycin-resistant 
enterococci (VRE) but limited activity against Gram-negative bacilli, including 
Bacteroides spp. We used a mouse model to investigate the impact of surotomycin 
exposure on the microbiome, and to test the consequences of the disruption on 
colonization by vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) and extended-spectrum 
β-lactamase-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae (ESBL-KP), in comparison with the 
effects of oral vancomycin and metronidazole. Mice (8 per group) received 
saline, vancomycin, metronidazole, or surotomycin through an orogastric tube 
daily for 5 days and were challenged with 10(5) CFU of VRE or ESBL-KP 
administered through an orogastric tube on day 2 of treatment. The 
concentrations of the pathogens in stool were determined during and after 
treatment by plating on selective media. A second experiment was conducted to 
determine if the antibiotics would inhibit established VRE colonization. In 
comparison to controls, oral vancomycin promoted VRE and ESBL-KP overgrowth in 
stool (8 log10 to 10 log10 CFU/g; P < 0.001), whereas metronidazole did not (<4 
log10 CFU/g; P > 0.5). Surotomycin promoted ESBL-KP overgrowth (>8 log10 CFU/g; 
P, <0.001 for comparison with saline controls) but not VRE overgrowth. 
Surotomycin suppressed preexisting VRE colonization, whereas metronidazole and 
vancomycin did not. These results suggest that treatment of CDI with surotomycin 
could reduce levels of VRE acquisition and overgrowth from those with agents 
such as vancomycin and metronidazole. However, surotomycin and vancomycin may 
promote colonization by antibiotic-resistant Gram-negative bacilli.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02904-15
PMCID: PMC4879352
PMID: 26976870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


724. J Immunol. 2006 Sep 1;177(5):3355-61. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.5.3355.

Corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 2-deficient mice have reduced 
intestinal inflammatory responses.

Kokkotou E(1), Torres D, Moss AC, O'Brien M, Grigoriadis DE, Karalis K, 
Pothoulakis C.

Author information:
(1)Gastrointestinal Neuropeptide Center, Gastroenterology Division, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) and urocortins (Ucn) bind with various 
affinities to two G-protein-coupled receptors, CRHR1 and CRHR2, which are 
expressed in brain and in peripheral tissues, including immune cells. 
CRHR2-deficient mice display anxiety-like behavior, hypersensitivity to stress, 
altered feeding behavior and metabolism, and cardiovascular abnormalities. 
However, the phenotype of these mice in inflammatory responses has not been 
determined. In the present study we found that compared with wild-type 
CRHR2-null mice developed substantially reduced intestinal inflammation and had 
lower intestinal mRNA expression of the potent chemoattractants keratinocyte 
chemokine and monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 following intraluminal exposure 
to Clostridium difficile toxin A, a potent enterotoxin that mediates 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis in humans. This effect was 
recapitulated by administration of astressin 2B, a selective CRHR2 antagonist, 
before toxin A exposure. Moreover, Ab array analysis revealed reduced expression 
of several inflammatory chemokines, including keratinocyte chemokine and 
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1 in toxin A-exposed mice pretreated with 
astressin 2B. Real-time RT-PCR of wild-type mouse intestine showed that only 
UcnII, but not other Ucn, was significantly up-regulated by ileal administration 
of toxin A at 4 h compared with buffer exposure. We also found that human 
colonic epithelial HT-29 cells express CRHR2alpha mRNA, whereas expression of 
beta and gamma spliced variants was minimal. Moreover, treatment of HT-29 cells 
with UcnII, which binds exclusively to CRHR2, stimulated expression of IL-8 and 
monocyte chemoattractant protein 1. Taken together, these results provide direct 
evidence that CRHR2 mediates intestinal inflammatory responses via release of 
proinflammatory mediators at the colonocyte level.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.177.5.3355
PMID: 16920976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


725. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2020 Nov;44(8):1428-1438. doi: 10.1002/jpen.1851. 
Epub 2020 Jun 4.

A Spore-Forming Probiotic Supplement Improves the Intestinal Immune Response and 
Protects the Intestinal Health During Recurrent Clostridioides difficile 
Colonization in Mice.

Ramezani Kapourchali F(1), Glueck B(1), Han Y(1), Shapiro D(1), Fulmer CG(2), 
Cresci GAM(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(2)Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(4)Center for Human Nutrition, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

BACKGROUND: Around 15%-30% of patients develop recurrent Clostridioides 
difficile infection (CDI) as conventional therapies disrupt protective gut 
microbiota. We tested if supplementation with a spore-forming probiotic would 
protect intestinal health in a mouse model of recurrent CD colonization.
METHODS: Methods: Female CF-1 mice were exposed to CD spores (4-log10 
colony-forming units/10 μL) and then randomly assigned to receive either saline 
(CD-S) or probiotic (CD-PRO). Control mice received only saline (control). 
Following confirmation of initial CD colonization, mice were treated with 
vancomycin (10 days). After 5 days, mice recolonized with CD were treated again 
with vancomycin (10 days) and euthanized 5 days later. Fecal samples were 
collected at select time points for bacterial analysis. Following euthanasia, 
blood samples, cecum contents, and the intestine were collected for analysis.
RESULTS: Probiotic supplementation mitigated the antibiotic-induced changes in 
cecum weight (P < .001). Probiotic-supplemented mice had increased messenger RNA 
expression of several immune parameters, accompanied by lower serum iron levels 
compared with CD-S mice (P < .05). Lower expressions of TNF α and calprotectin 
(P ≤ .05) were observed in CD-PRO mice compared with CD-S. The probiotics also 
supported the expression of intestinal tight junction proteins, which were 
diminished in the proximal colon of CD-S mice (P < .05).
CONCLUSION: Mice supplemented with targeted spore-forming probiotics exhibited 
improved immune responses and nutrition immunity properties, which were linked 
with less inflammation and enhanced intestinal barrier proteins during recurrent 
CD colonization.

© 2020 American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1002/jpen.1851
PMID: 32495964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


726. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1767-75. doi: 
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.05.020. Epub 2013 May 31.

Expression and cytoprotective activity of the small GTPase RhoB induced by the 
Escherichia coli cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1.

Huelsenbeck SC(1), Roggenkamp D, May M, Huelsenbeck J, Brakebusch C, Rottner K, 
Ladwein M, Just I, Fritz G, Schmidt G, Genth H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Hannover Medical School, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

RhoB is the only member of the Rho subfamily of small GTPases, which is 
classified as an immediate early gene product. RhoB is up-regulated in response 
to growth factors as well as cytotoxic and genotoxic agents. Clostridial 
glucosylating toxins have been reported to evoke pronounced RhoB expression, 
based on the inactivation of Rho/Ras proteins. In this study, we report on a 
long lasting expression of RhoB in cultured cells upon activation of Rho 
proteins by the cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 (CNF1) from Escherichia coli. The 
observations of this study highlight a new pathway involving Rac1, which 
positively regulates the activity of the rhoB promoter and RhoB expression. 
Conversely, the isomeric cytotoxic necrotizing factor from Yersinia 
pseudotuberculosis (CNFy) drives GTP-loading of basal RhoB but fails to cause 
activation of the rhoB promoter and thus its expression. CNF1 inhibits 
cytokinesis and induces the formation of bi-nucleated (tetraploid) cells. Upon 
long term treatment with CNF1, RhoB(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) 
exhibit DNA fragmentation, phosphatidylserine exposure, and loss of membrane 
integrity, while RhoB(+/-) MEFs persist as bi-nucleated (tetraploid) cells 
without any signs of cell death. In conclusion, the cytoprotective RhoB response 
is not only evoked by bacterial protein toxins inactivating Rho/Ras proteins but 
also by the Rac1-activating toxin CNF1.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.05.020
PMID: 23732113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


727. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 2;9(7):e101267. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101267. 
eCollection 2014.

Metabolomics analysis identifies intestinal microbiota-derived biomarkers of 
colonization resistance in clindamycin-treated mice.

Jump RL(1), Polinkovsky A(2), Hurless K(2), Sitzlar B(2), Eckart K(2), Tomas 
M(3), Deshpande A(2), Nerandzic MM(2), Donskey CJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Cleveland Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America; Division of 
Infectious Diseases and HIV Medicine, Department of Medicine, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Research Service, Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, 
United States of America.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases and HIV Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(4)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Cleveland Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America; Division of 
Infectious Diseases and HIV Medicine, Department of Medicine, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America; Research Service, 
Cleveland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of 
America.

BACKGROUND: The intestinal microbiota protect the host against enteric pathogens 
through a defense mechanism termed colonization resistance. Antibiotics excreted 
into the intestinal tract may disrupt colonization resistance and alter normal 
metabolic functions of the microbiota. We used a mouse model to test the 
hypothesis that alterations in levels of bacterial metabolites in fecal 
specimens could provide useful biomarkers indicating disrupted or intact 
colonization resistance after antibiotic treatment.
METHODS: To assess in vivo colonization resistance, mice were challenged with 
oral vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus or Clostridium difficile spores at 
varying time points after treatment with the lincosamide antibiotic clindamycin. 
For concurrent groups of antibiotic-treated mice, stool samples were analyzed 
using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to assess changes in the 
microbiota and using non-targeted metabolic profiling. To assess whether the 
findings were applicable to another antibiotic class that suppresses intestinal 
anaerobes, similar experiments were conducted with piperacillin/tazobactam.
RESULTS: Colonization resistance began to recover within 5 days and was intact 
by 12 days after clindamycin treatment, coinciding with the recovery bacteria 
from the families Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae, both part of the phylum 
Firmicutes. Clindamycin treatment caused marked changes in metabolites present 
in fecal specimens. Of 484 compounds analyzed, 146 (30%) exhibited a significant 
increase or decrease in concentration during clindamycin treatment followed by 
recovery to baseline that coincided with restoration of in vivo colonization 
resistance. Identified as potential biomarkers of colonization resistance, these 
compounds included intermediates in carbohydrate or protein metabolism that 
increased (pentitols, gamma-glutamyl amino acids and inositol metabolites) or 
decreased (pentoses, dipeptides) with clindamycin treatment. 
Piperacillin/tazobactam treatment caused similar alterations in the intestinal 
microbiota and fecal metabolites.
CONCLUSIONS: Recovery of colonization resistance after antibiotic treatment 
coincided with restoration of several fecal bacterial metabolites. These 
metabolites could provide useful biomarkers indicating intact or disrupted 
colonization resistance during and after antibiotic treatment.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101267
PMCID: PMC4079339
PMID: 24988418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Atlantic Philanthropies, 
Inc., and STERIS Corporation provided funding towards this study. There are no 
patents, products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not 
alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.


728. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2002 Jun;365(6):468-76. doi: 
10.1007/s00210-002-0546-x. Epub 2002 Apr 9.

Signalling components involved in the coupling of alpha 1-adrenoceptors to 
phospholipase D in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes.

Gosau N(1), Fahimi-Vahid M, Michalek C, Schmidt M, Wieland T.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Experimentelle und Klinische Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, 
Germany.

Activation of phospholipase D (PLD) is assumed to be one major pathway by which 
alpha(1)-adrenoceptors (alpha(1)ARs) induce hypertrophic responses in cardiac 
myocytes. Heterotrimeric G proteins, protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms, protein 
tyrosine kinases, monomeric GTPases of the ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) and Rho 
families, and as important cofactor phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 
(PIP(2)) seem to participate in the G protein-coupled receptor dependent 
regulation of PLD. We therefore studied the role of these components in the 
coupling of alpha(1)ARs to PLD in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes (NRCM). 
Stimulation of alpha(1)ARs, most likely of the alpha(1A) subtype, by 
noradrenaline increased PLD activity three- to fourfold concomitant with the 
stimulation of phospholipase C (PLC). In contrast, the partial agonist 
phenylephrine stimulated PLC, but failed to increase PLD activity. The PLC and 
PLD responses were pertussis toxin insensitive and treatment of the cells with 
the G(q)-activating toxin of Pasteurella multocida stimulated both 
phospholipases about fourfold. Over-expression of the G(q)-and 
G(i)-type-specific regulator of G protein signalling RGS4 blunted 
alpha(1)AR-induced PLC and PLD stimulation. Ro 31-8220, known to inhibit 
Ca(2+)-dependent and -independent PKC isoforms, strongly inhibited PLD activity, 
whereas Gö 6976, known to inhibit preferentially Ca(2+)-dependent PKC isozymes, 
was without effect. The ARF signalling inhibitor brefeldin A, protein tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors and the Rho-inactivating toxin B of Clostridium difficile 
blunted alpha(1)AR-induced PLD stimulation and largely reduced the cellular 
PIP(2) content. In membranes of toxin B-treated NCRM, PLD activity was similarly 
reduced, but was fully restored by addition of exogenous PIP(2). We conclude, 
that alpha(1A)ARs stimulate PLD activity via a G(q/11)-PLCbeta-novel PKC 
isoform-dependent pathway in NRCM. ARF and Rho GTPases as well as protein 
tyrosine kinases contribute to PLD stimulation in NRCM, most likely by 
regulating the supply of PIP(2).

DOI: 10.1007/s00210-002-0546-x
PMID: 12070761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


729. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2019 Jul 1;374:32-40. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2019.04.019. 
Epub 2019 Apr 26.

Preclinical evaluation of the maximum tolerated dose and toxicokinetics of 
enteric-coated lantibiotic OG253 capsules.

Rajeshkumar NV(1), Kers JA(2), Moncrief S(1), Defusco AW(3), Park JH(3), 
Handfield M(4).

Author information:
(1)Intrexon Corporation, Human Therapeutics Division, 20358 Seneca Meadows Pkwy, 
Germantown, MD 20876, USA.
(2)Intrexon Corporation, Industrial Products Division, 29 Oyster Point Blvd., 
South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(3)Oragenics, Inc., 13700 Progress Blvd., Alachua, FL 32608, USA.
(4)Oragenics, Inc., 13700 Progress Blvd., Alachua, FL 32608, USA. Electronic 
address: mhandfield@oragenics.com.

Clostridium difficile associated disease (CDAD) is the leading infectious cause 
of antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis in the United States. Both the 
incidence and severity of CDAD have been increased over the past two decades. We 
evaluated the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) and toxicokinetics of OG253, a novel 
lantibiotic in development for the treatment of CDAD. OG253 was orally 
administered to Wistar Han rats as enteric-coated capsules in a one-day dose 
escalation study, followed by a seven-day repeated dose toxicokinetics study. 
All three doses of OG253 (6.75, 27 and 108 mg/day) were generally well-tolerated 
with no treatment-related clinical signs, alterations in body weight or food 
consumption in both one-day acute tolerability and seven-days repeated dose 
tolerability and toxicokinetics study. OG253 capsule administration neither 
significantly alter the weight of organs nor affect the hematology, coagulation, 
clinical biochemistry parameters and urine pH compared to placebo capsule 
administered rats. LC-MS/MS analysis did not detect OG253 in the plasma, 
indicating that OG253 is not absorbed into the blood from the rat 
gastrointestinal tract. Glandular atrophy of the rectal mucosa was noticed in 
two out of six rats administered with a high dose of OG253. Surprisingly, we 
found that OG253 treatment significantly lowered both serum cholesterol and 
triglyceride levels in both sexes of rats. Overall, there was a 29.8 and 61.38% 
decrease in the serum cholesterol and triglyceride levels, respectively as 
compared to placebo-treated rats. The well-tolerated high dose of OG253 
(425.7 mg/kg/day) is recommended as the MTD for safety and efficacy studies. 
Further preclinical study is needed to evaluate the safety profile of OG253 
under longer exposure.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2019.04.019
PMID: 31034929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


730. mBio. 2020 May 5;11(3):e00180-20. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00180-20.

Systemic Inflammatory Mediators Are Effective Biomarkers for Predicting Adverse 
Outcomes in Clostridioides difficile Infection.

Dieterle MG(1)(2), Putler R(3), Perry DA(3), Menon A(3), Abernathy-Close L(2), 
Perlman NS(3), Penkevich A(3), Standke A(3), Keidan M(3), Vendrov KC(3), Bergin 
IL(4), Young VB(2)(3), Rao K(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Michigan Medical School, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(3)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA.
(4)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(5)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA krirao@med.umich.edu.

Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) can result in severe disease and death, 
with no accurate models that allow for early prediction of adverse outcomes. To 
address this need, we sought to develop serum-based biomarker models to predict 
CDI outcomes. We prospectively collected sera ≤48 h after diagnosis of CDI in 
two cohorts. Biomarkers were measured with a custom multiplex bead array assay. 
Patients were classified using IDSA severity criteria and the development of 
disease-related complications (DRCs), which were defined as ICU admission, 
colectomy, and/or death attributed to CDI. Unadjusted and adjusted models were 
built using logistic and elastic net modeling. The best model for severity 
included procalcitonin (PCT) and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) with an area 
(AUC) under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.74 (95% 
confidence interval, 0.67 to 0.81). The best model for 30-day mortality included 
interleukin-8 (IL-8), PCT, CXCL-5, IP-10, and IL-2Rα with an AUC of 0.89 (0.84 
to 0.95). The best model for DRCs included IL-8, procalcitonin, HGF, and IL-2Rα 
with an AUC of 0.84 (0.73 to 0.94). To validate our models, we employed 
experimental infection of mice with C. difficile Antibiotic-treated mice were 
challenged with C. difficile and a similar panel of serum biomarkers was 
measured. Applying each model to the mouse cohort of severe and nonsevere CDI 
revealed AUCs of 0.59 (0.44 to 0.74), 0.96 (0.90 to 1.0), and 0.89 (0.81 to 
0.97). In both human and murine CDI, models based on serum biomarkers predicted 
adverse CDI outcomes. Our results support the use of serum-based biomarker 
panels to inform Clostridioides difficile infection treatment.IMPORTANCE Each 
year in the United States, Clostridioides difficile causes nearly 500,000 
gastrointestinal infections that range from mild diarrhea to severe colitis and 
death. The ability to identify patients at increased risk for severe disease or 
mortality at the time of diagnosis of C. difficile infection (CDI) would allow 
clinicians to effectively allocate disease modifying therapies. In this study, 
we developed models consisting of only a small number of serum biomarkers that 
are capable of predicting both 30-day all-cause mortality and adverse outcomes 
of patients at time of CDI diagnosis. We were able to validate these models 
through experimental mouse infection. This provides evidence that the biomarkers 
reflect the underlying pathophysiology and that our mouse model of CDI reflects 
the pathogenesis of human infection. Predictive models can not only assist 
clinicians in identifying patients at risk for severe CDI but also be utilized 
for targeted enrollment in clinical trials aimed at reduction of adverse 
outcomes from severe CDI.

Copyright © 2020 Dieterle et al.

DOI: 10.1128/mBio.00180-20
PMCID: PMC7403776
PMID: 32371595


731. Anaerobe. 2017 Dec;48:110-114. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.08.003. Epub 2017 
Aug 9.

Stability and efficacy of frozen and lyophilized fecal microbiota transplant 
(FMT) product in a mouse model of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI).

Jiang ZD(1), Alexander A(2), Ke S(1), Valilis EM(1), Hu S(3), Li B(1), DuPont 
HL(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases, Department of Epidemiology, Human Genetics & 
Environmental Sciences, School of Public Health, UT Health Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Kelsey Research Foundation, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Center for Infectious Diseases, Department of Epidemiology, Human Genetics & 
Environmental Sciences, School of Public Health, UT Health Houston, TX, USA; 
Jiangxi Children's Hospital, Nanchang, China.
(4)Center for Infectious Diseases, Department of Epidemiology, Human Genetics & 
Environmental Sciences, School of Public Health, UT Health Houston, TX, USA; 
Kelsey Research Foundation, Houston, TX, USA; University of Texas, McGovern 
Medical School, USA. Electronic address: Herbert.L.Dupont@uth.tmc.edu.

Freezing donor fecal microbiota has simplified fecal microbiota transplantation 
(FMT) in the treatment of recurrent C. difficile infection (CDI). However, the 
optimal storage time for the frozen FMT products remains unknown. Using an 
established murine model of CDI, stability and efficacy of frozen and 
lyophilized FMT product was studied at time points from 2 months to 15 months. 
DNA was extracted from fecal samples from the mice with identification of 
specific bacterial species by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). FMT product 
stability and efficacy were measured by occurrence of diarrhea in the challenged 
mice together with stability of the microbiota composition. The results were 
analyzed and compared by SAS statistical software. All mice treated with only 
C. difficile developed diarrhea within 72 h. Mice treated with frozen 
(n = 5/group), lyophilized (n = 5/group) products stored for ≤ 7-month or fresh 
FMT product (n = 22) were protected from post C. difficile challenge diarrhea. 
There was no difference between frozen and lyophilized products (n = 5/group) 
stored for ≤ 7 months 95% CI 1.00 (0.38-2.64) and 1.00 (0.38-2.64), 
respectively. Prevention if CDI by frozen and lyophilized product was not 
different for storage of 9-, 11- and 15-months. qPCR results demonstrated there 
were no significant quantitative change in Bacteroides and Clostridium species 
during any of the storage times (P > 0.05). In the present study, frozen and 
lyophilized FMT products were stored up to 7 months without losing microbiota 
composition and therapeutic efficacy. The animal model described may be useful 
to study stability of human microbiota designed for FMT.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2017.08.003
PMID: 28801119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


732. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 2;13(10):e0205055. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205055. 
eCollection 2018.

Dietary or supplemental fermentable fiber intake reduces the presence of 
Clostridium XI in mouse intestinal microbiota: The importance of higher fecal 
bacterial load and density.

Zheng W(1), Wang K(2), Sun Y(1)(3)(4), Kuo SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, NY, United States of America.
(2)Department of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, University at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, NY, United States of America.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, 
NY, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United 
States of America.

OBJECTIVES: Clostridium difficile infection is a public health concern. C. 
difficile was found in healthy human intestine as a member of Clostridium XI. 
Because soluble fermentable fiber ingestion affects intestinal microbiota, we 
used fiber-containing diets to determine the intestinal microbial condition that 
could reduce the presence of Clostridium XI.
METHODS: Newly weaned male mice were assigned to three published diets: Control 
AIN-93G purified diet with only poorly fermented cellulose; Control plus 5% 
purified fermentable fiber inulin; Chow with wheat, soybean and corn that 
provide a mixture of unpurified dietary fibers. Methods were developed to 
quantify 24-hour fecal microbial load and microbial DNA density. The relative 
abundance of bacterial genera and the bacterial diversity were determined 
through 16S rRNA sequence-based fecal microbiota analysis.
RESULTS: Mice adjusted food intake to maintain the same energy intake and body 
weight under these three moderate-fat (7% w:w) diets. Chow-feeding led to higher 
food intake but also higher 24-h fecal output. Chow-feeding and 1-8 wk ingestion 
of inulin-supplemented diet increased daily fecal microbial load and density 
along with lowering the prevalence of Clostridium XI to undetectable. 
Clostridium XI remained undetectable until 4 weeks after the termination of 
inulin-supplemented diet. Fermentable fiber intake did not consistently increase 
probiotic genera such as Bifidobacterium or Lactobacillus. Chow feeding, but not 
inulin supplementation, increased the bacterial diversity.
CONCLUSIONS: Increase fecal microbial load/density upon fermentable fiber 
ingestion is associated with a lower and eventually undetectable presence of 
Clostridium XI. Higher bacterial diversity or abundance of particular genera is 
not apparently essential. Future studies are needed to see whether this 
observation can be translated into the reduction of C. difficile at the species 
level in at-risk populations.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205055
PMCID: PMC6168175
PMID: 30278071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


733. Anaerobe. 2019 Dec;60:102083. doi: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2019.102083. Epub 2019 Aug 
1.

In silico, in vitro and in vivo analysis of putative virulence factors 
identified in large clostridial toxin-negative, binary toxin- producing 
C. difficile strains.

Androga GO(1), Knight DR(2), Hutton ML(3), Mileto SJ(3), James ML(3), Evans 
C(3), Lyras D(3), Chang BJ(4), Foster NF(5), Riley TV(6).

Author information:
(1)The University of Western Australia, School of Biomedical Sciences, Western 
Australia, Australia; PathWest Laboratory Medicine, Queen Elizabeth II Medical 
Centre, Western Australia, Australia.
(2)Murdoch University, Medical, Molecular and Forensic Sciences, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(3)Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and 
Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Victoria, Australia.
(4)The University of Western Australia, School of Biomedical Sciences, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(5)Department of Health, Communicable Disease Control Directorate, Western 
Australia, Australia.
(6)The University of Western Australia, School of Biomedical Sciences, Western 
Australia, Australia; PathWest Laboratory Medicine, Queen Elizabeth II Medical 
Centre, Western Australia, Australia; Murdoch University, Medical, Molecular and 
Forensic Sciences, Western Australia, Australia; Edith Cowan University, School 
of Medical and Health Sciences, Western Australia, Australia. Electronic 
address: thomas.riley@uwa.edu.au.

The relevance of large clostridial toxin-negative, binary toxin-producing 
(A-B-CDT+) Clostridium difficile strains in human infection is still 
controversial. In this study, we investigated putative virulence traits that may 
contribute to the role of A-B-CDT+C. difficile strains in idiopathic diarrhea. 
Phenotypic assays were conducted on 148 strains of C. difficile comprising 10 
different A-B-CDT+C. difficile ribotypes (RTs): 033, 238, 239, 288, 585, 586, 
QX143, QX444, QX521 and QX629. A subset of these isolates (n = 53) was 
whole-genome sequenced to identify genetic loci associated with virulence and 
survival. Motility studies showed that with the exception of RT 239 all RTs 
tested were non-motile. C. difficile RTs 033 and 288 had deletions in the F2 and 
F3 regions of their flagella operon while the F2 region was absent from strains 
of RTs 238, 585, 586, QX143, QX444, QX521 and QX629. The flagellin and flagella 
cap genes, fliC and fliD, respectively, involved in adherence and host 
colonization, were conserved in all strains, including reference strains. All 
A-B-CDT+C. difficile strains produced at least three extracellular enzymes 
(deoxyribonuclease, esterase and mucinase) indicating that these are important 
extracellular proteins. The toxicity of A-B-CDT+C. difficile strains in Vero 
cells was confirmed, however, pathogenicity was not demonstrated in a mouse 
model of disease. Despite successful colonization by most strains, there was no 
evidence of disease in mice. This study provides the first in-depth analysis of 
A-B-CDT+C. difficile strains and contributes to the current limited knowledge of 
these strains as a cause of C. difficile infection.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2019.102083
PMID: 31377188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


734. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2001 Sep;12(9):1853-61.

Expression of connective tissue growth factor in human renal fibroblasts: 
regulatory roles of RhoA and cAMP.

Heusinger-Ribeiro J(1), Eberlein M, Wahab NA, Goppelt-Struebe M.

Author information:
(1)Medical Clinic IV, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.

The induction of connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) was investigated in a 
human renal fibroblast cell line that exhibited many characteristics of primary 
human renal fibroblasts. Induction of CTGF mRNA was observed after treatment of 
the cells with transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) or, even more 
prominently, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). LPA induced a rapid transient increase 
in CTGF mRNA expression, with maximal levels being observed after 1 to 2 h. This 
increase was accompanied by CTGF protein synthesis. Induction of CTGF was 
insensitive to pertussis toxin and was not dependent on the activation of p42/44 
mitogen-activated protein kinases. Inhibition of the proteins of the Rho family 
with toxin B from Clostridium difficile abrogated basal and LPA-mediated 
induction of CTGF. Specific targeting of RhoA with C3 exotoxin or of the Rho 
kinases with the inhibitor Y-27632 similarly prevented induction of CTGF, 
implicating RhoA as a signaling module downstream of LPA. Inhibition of RhoA 
depolymerized the actin cytoskeleton, as did treatment with cytochalasin D. 
Preincubation of the human renal fibroblasts with cytochalasin D prevented 
induction of CTGF by LPA, indicating a strong contribution of an intact 
cytoskeleton. Interference with RhoA signaling similarly inhibited the induction 
of CTGF by TGF-beta. Elevation of intracellular levels of cAMP and thus 
activation of protein kinase A prevented induction of CTGF expression. The 
cytoskeletal effects of cAMP, however, were reversed by LPA. These data indicate 
complex interactions involving LPA-mediated activation of RhoA- and protein 
kinase A-dependent signaling pathways. The data thus demonstrate the regulatory 
functions of the small GTPase RhoA and of an intact cytoskeleton in the 
expression of CTGF after stimulation with LPA or TGF-beta. Analogous signal 
transduction pathways were previously demonstrated in rat mesangial cells, 
suggesting a more general role for RhoA in the regulation of CTGF expression.

PMID: 11518778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


735. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003 Feb;304(2):713-22. doi: 10.1124/jpet.102.043893.

Endocannabinoids induce ileitis in rats via the capsaicin receptor (VR1).

McVey DC(1), Schmid PC, Schmid HH, Vigna SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Intraluminal administration of the endocannabinoids N-arachidonoyl-ethanolamine 
(anandamide) and 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) causes inflammation similar to 
that caused by Clostridium difficile toxin A in the rat ileum. The effects of 
anandamide and 2-AG were significantly inhibited by pretreatment with the 
specific capsaicin receptor (vanilloid receptor subtype 1; VR1) antagonist 
capsazepine. Pretreatment with the CB1 and CB2 cannabinoid receptor antagonists 
N-piperidino-5-(4-chlorophenyl)-1-(2,4-dichlorophenyl)-4-methyl-3-pyrazole-carboxamide 
(SR141716) and 
N-[1S)-endo-1,3,3-trimethylbicyclo[2.2.1]heptan-2-yl]-5-(4-chloro-3-methylphenyl)-1-(4-methylbenzyl)-pyrazole-3-carboxamide 
(SR144528) did not affect the responses to anandamide. It has previously been 
shown that intraluminal toxin A stimulates substance P (SP) release from primary 
sensory neurons and that pretreatment with SP receptor [neurokinin (NK)-1 
receptor] antagonists inhibits the inflammatory effects of toxin A. Anandamide 
stimulated SP release and this was blocked by capsazepine pretreatment. Also, 
pretreatment with the specific NK-1 receptor antagonist 
(2S,3S)-3-([3,5-bis[trifluoromethyl)phenyl]methoxy)-2-phenylpiperidine 
(L-733,060) significantly inhibited the inflammatory effects of both toxin A and 
anandamide. Toxin A increased tissue concentrations of anandamide and 2-AG in 
the ileum, and these effects were enhanced after pretreatment with inhibitors of 
fatty acid amide hydrolase, a major endocannabinoid-degrading enzyme. The toxin 
A-stimulated release of anandamide but not 2-AG was selective over their 
congeners. These results demonstrate that the endocannabinoids anandamide and 
2-AG stimulate intestinal primary sensory neurons via the capsaicin VR1 receptor 
to release SP, resulting in enteritis, and that endocannabinoids may mediate the 
inflammatory effects of toxin A.

DOI: 10.1124/jpet.102.043893
PMID: 12538826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


736. Front Immunol. 2019 Mar 7;10:341. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00341. eCollection 
2019.

Differences in Systemic IgA Reactivity and Circulating Th Subsets in Healthy 
Volunteers With Specific Microbiota Enterotypes.

Grosserichter-Wagener C(1), Radjabzadeh D(2), van der Weide H(1), Smit KN(1), 
Kraaij R(2), Hays JP(3), van Zelm MC(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(2)Department Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Erasmus MC, 
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Department Immunology and Pathology, Central Clinical School, Monash 
University and The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

Changes in the intestinal microbiota have been associated with the development 
of immune-mediated diseases in humans. Additionally, the introduction of defined 
bacterial species into the mouse intestinal microbiota has been shown to impact 
on the adaptive immune response. However, how much impact the intestinal 
microbiota composition actually has on regulating adaptive immunity remains 
poorly understood. Therefore, we studied aspects of the adaptive immunity in 
healthy adults possessing distinct intestinal microbiota profiles. The 
intestinal microbiota composition was determined via Illumina sequencing of 
bacterial 16S rRNA genes extracted from the feces of 35 individuals. Blood 
B-cell and T-cell subsets from the same individuals were studied using flow 
cytometry. Finally, the binding of fecal and plasma Immunoglobulin A (IgA) to 
intestinal bacteria (associated with health and disease) Bacteroides fragilis, 
Prevotella copri, Bifidobacterium longum, Clostridium difficile, and Escherichia 
coli was analyzed using ELISA. Unsupervised clustering of microbiota composition 
revealed the presence of three clusters within the cohort. Cluster 1 and 2 were 
similar to previously-described enterotypes with a predominance of Bacteroides 
in Cluster 1 and Prevotella in Cluster 2. The bacterial diversity (Shannon 
index) and bacterial richness of Cluster 3 was significantly higher than 
observed in Clusters 1 and 2, with the Ruminococacceae tending to predominate. 
Within circulating B- and T-cell subsets, only Th subsets were significantly 
different between groups of distinct intestinal microbiota. Individuals of 
Cluster 3 have significantly fewer Th17 and Th22 circulating cells, while Th17.1 
cell numbers were increased in individuals of Cluster 1. IgA reactivity to 
intestinal bacteria was higher in plasma than feces, and individuals of Cluster 
1 had significant higher plasma IgA reactivity against B. longum than 
individuals of Cluster 2. In conclusion, we identified three distinct fecal 
microbiota clusters, of which two clusters resembled previously-described 
"enterotypes". Global T-cell and B-cell immunity seemed unaffected, however, 
circulating Th subsets and plasma IgA reactivity were significantly different 
between Clusters. Hence, the impact of intestinal bacteria composition on human 
B cells, T cells and IgA reactivity appears limited in genetically-diverse and 
environmentally-exposed humans, but can skew antibody reactivity and Th cell 
subsets.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2019.00341
PMCID: PMC6417458
PMID: 30899257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


737. Biochem J. 1998 Mar 15;330 ( Pt 3)(Pt 3):1107-14. doi: 10.1042/bj3301107.

Lysophosphatidic acid-mediated signal-transduction pathways involved in the 
induction of the early-response genes prostaglandin G/H synthase-2 and Egr-1: a 
critical role for the mitogen-activated protein kinase p38 and for Rho proteins.

Reiser CO(1), Lanz T, Hofmann F, Hofer G, Rupprecht HD, Goppelt-Struebe M.

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik IV, Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg, Loschgestr. 8, D-91054 
Erlangen, Germany.

During inflammatory processes of the kidney, lesions of the glomerulus lead to 
aggregation of thrombocytes and infiltration of macrophages, which can release 
bioactive mediators. One of these important signalling molecules is 
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). Incubation of rat mesangial cells with LPA induced 
mRNA and protein expression of the early-response genes pghs-2 (for 
prostaglandin G/H synthase-2/cyclo-oxygenase-2) and egr-1. As shown by antisense 
experiments, induction of egr-1 was related to the strong mitogenic effect of 
LPA. LPA-mediated gene expression was inhibited by pertussis toxin, indicating 
coupling to G-proteins of the Gi family. Specific inhibition of proteins of the 
small G-protein subfamily Rho with toxin B from Clostridium difficile led to 
changes in mesangial cell morphology without induction of apoptosis. 
LPA-mediated expression of pghs-2 and egr-1 was reduced to base-line levels by 
toxin B, indicating a role for Rho proteins in LPA-mediated gene induction. Of 
the two mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways investigated, the MAPK 
kinase-extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway was involved in the 
induction of both pghs-2 and egr-1 mRNA expression, as shown by the inhibitory 
effect of PD98059. Activation of the MAPK p38, however, was only related to 
pghs-2 expression, whereas egr-1 expression was not affected by treatment of 
mesangial cells with the specific inhibitor SB203580. Taken together our data 
provide evidence that LPA-mediated activation of MAPK kinase and Rho proteins 
leads to the induction of the functionally distinct early-response genes pghs-2 
and egr-1, whereas activation of MAPK p38 revealed considerable differences 
between the regulation of these two genes.

DOI: 10.1042/bj3301107
PMCID: PMC1219250
PMID: 9494074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


738. PLoS One. 2016 Oct 6;11(10):e0164227. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164227. 
eCollection 2016.

In Vitro Antibacterial Activity of Rhodanine Derivatives against Pathogenic 
Clinical Isolates.

AbdelKhalek A(1), Ashby CR Jr(2), Patel BA(2), Talele TT(2), Seleem MN(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Purdue 
University, 625 Harrison Street, West Lafayette, Indiana, 47907, United States 
of America.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy and Health 
Sciences, St. John's University, 8000 Utopia Parkway, Queens, New York, 11439, 
United States of America.
(3)Purdue Institute for Inflammation, Immunology, and Infectious Disease, Purdue 
University, West Lafayette, Indiana, 47907, United States of America.

Bacterial infections present a serious challenge to healthcare practitioners due 
to the emergence of resistance to numerous conventional antibacterial drugs. 
Therefore, new bacterial targets and new antimicrobials are unmet medical needs. 
Rhodanine derivatives have been shown to possess potent antimicrobial activity 
via a novel mechanism. However, their potential use as antibacterials has not 
been fully examined. In this study, we determined the spectrum of activity of 
seven rhodanine derivatives (compounds Rh 1-7) against clinical isolates of 
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial strains and Candida albicans. We also 
synthesized and tested three additional compounds, ethyl ester and amide of 
rhodanine 2 (Rh 8 and Rh 10, respectively) and ethyl ester of rhodanine 3 (Rh 9) 
to determine the significance of the carboxyl group modification towards 
antibacterial activity and human serum albumin binding. A broth microdilution 
assay confirmed Rh 1-7 exhibit bactericidal activity against Gram-positive 
pathogens. Rh 2 had significant activity against various vancomycin-resistant 
(MIC90 = 4 μM) and methicillin-resistant (MIC90 = 4 μM) Staphylococcus aureus 
(VRSA and MRSA), Staphylococcus epidermidis (MIC = 4 μM) and 
vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE) strains (MIC90 = 8 μM). The rhodanine 
compounds exhibited potent activity against Bacillus spp., including Bacillus 
anthracis, with MIC range of 2-8 μM. In addition, they had potent activity 
against Clostridium difficile. The most potent compound, Rh 2, at 4 and 8 times 
its MIC, significantly decreased S. epidermidis biofilm mass by more than 35% 
and 45%, respectively. None of the rhodanine compounds showed antimicrobial 
activity (MIC > 128 μM) against various 1) Gram-negative pathogens 
(Acinetobacter baumannii, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumonia, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, and Salmonella Typhimurium) or 2) strains of Candida albicans (MIC > 
64 μM). The MTS assay confirmed that rhodanines were not toxic to mouse murine 
macrophage (J774.1A) up to 64 μM, human keratinocytes (HaCat) up to 32 μM, and 
human ileocecal colorectal cell (HRT-18) up to 128 μM. Overall, these data 
suggest that certain rhodanine compounds may have potential use for the 
treatment of several multidrug-resistant Gram-positive bacterial infections.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0164227
PMCID: PMC5053523
PMID: 27711156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


739. J Ethnopharmacol. 2020 Apr 6;251:112521. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.112521. Epub 
2019 Dec 25.

Effect of Sorbus domestica and its active constituents in an experimental model 
of colitis rats induced by acetic acid.

Küpeli Akkol E(1), Gürağaç Dereli FT(2), Taştan H(3), Sobarzo-Sánchez E(4), Khan 
H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Gazi University, Etiler, 
06330, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: esrak@gazi.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Gazi University, Etiler, 
06330, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Gazi University, Etiler, 06330, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Instituto de Investigación e Innovación en Salud Facultad de Ciencias de la 
Salud Universidad Central de Chile, Chile; Department of Organic Chemistry, 
Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Abdul Wali Khan University, Mardan, 23200, Pakistan.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: In Turkish folk medicine, leaves of Sorbus 
domestica are used for the treatment of burns, cough, stomachache, bradyuria, 
kidney stone. The fruits of this plant are used for diarrhoea.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study was carried out to investigate the effect of S. 
domestica on ulcerative colitis induced by acetic acid in rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The crude methanolic extract of fruits was sequentially 
fractionated into five subextracts; dichloromethane, diethyl ether, ethyl 
acetate, n-butanol and aqueous extracts. Effects of the extract, subextracts and 
fractions were investigated in acetic acid-induced rat colitis model. The 
colonic interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α), nitrite, superoxide 
dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH), lipid peroxidation (LPO), catalase (CAT), 
and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels as well as the caspase-3 and myeloperoxidase 
(MPO) activities were measured to determine the activity. Histopathological 
analyzes were also performed on the colon tissue of rats.
RESULTS: The methanolic extract and diethylether subextract have led to a 
noteworthy decrease in MPO, caspase-3, IL-6, TNF-α, MDA, and nitrite levels in 
the colon tissue and blood. In addition, histopathological analysis results were 
supported by biochemical parameters. After confirmation of the activity against 
ulcerative colitis, the diethyl ether subextract was subjected to more 
chromatographic separation for the isolation of compounds 1, 2 and 3. The 
structures of these three compounds were elucidated as vanillic acid 
4-O-α-L-rhamnopyranoside (1), protocateuic acid anhydrite (2) and 
trivanilloyl-(1,3,4-trihydroxybenzol) ester (3).
CONCLUSION: In this study, the potential of S. domestica in the treatment of 
colitis was investigated. Fruits of this plant were found to have important 
anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities. Through isolation techniques, 
vanillic acid 4-O-α-L-rhamnopyranoside, protocateuic acid anhydrite and 
trivanilloyl-(1,3,4-trihydroxybenzol) ester were determined as the main active 
components of the fruits. Consequently, S domestica might be a promising 
candidate for upcoming use the prevention and treatment of various disorders, 
such as inflammatory bowel diseases, irritable bowel syndrome and Clostridium 
difficile infection.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.112521
PMID: 31883473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.


740. MethodsX. 2019 Sep 27;6:2305-2321. doi: 10.1016/j.mex.2019.09.031. eCollection 
2019.

A practical synthesis of a novel DPAGT1 inhibitor, aminouridyl 
phenoxypiperidinbenzyl butanamide (APPB) for in vivo studies.

Mitachi K(1), Kurosu SM(1), Gillman CD(2), Yun HG(2), Clemons WM Jr(2), Kurosu 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, 881 Madison Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, United 
States.
(2)Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, 1200 E. California Blvd., Pasadena, CA 91125, United States.

Immunotherapy that targets N-linked glycans has not yet been developed due in 
large part to the lack of specificity of N-linked glycans between normal and 
malignant cells. N-Glycan chains are synthesized by the sequential action of 
glycosyl transferases in the Golgi apparatus. It is an overwhelming task to 
discover drug-like inhibitors of glycosyl transferases that block the synthesis 
of specific branching processes in cancer cells, killing tumor cells 
selectively. It has long been known that N-glycan biosynthesis can be inhibited 
by disruption of the first committed enzyme, dolichyl-phosphate 
N-acetylglucosaminephosphotransferase 1 (DPAGT1). Selective DPAGT1 inhibitors 
have the promising therapeutic potential for certain solid cancers that require 
increased branching of N-linked glycans in their growth progressions. Recently, 
we discovered that an anti-Clostridium difficile molecule, aminouridyl 
phenoxypiperidinbenzyl butanamide (APPB) showed DPAGT1 inhibitory activity with 
the IC50 value of 0.25 μM. It was confirmed that APPB inhibits N-glycosylation 
of β-catenin at 2.5 nM concentration. A sharp difference between APPB and 
tunicamycin was that the hemolytic activity of APPB is significantly attenuated 
(IC50 > 200 μM RBC). Water solubility of APPB is >350-times greater than that of 
tunicamycin (78.8 mg/mL for APPB, <0.2 mg/mL for tunicamycin). A novel DPAGT1 
inhibitor, APPB selectively inhibits growth of the solid tumors (e.g. KB, LoVo, 
SK-OV-3, MDA-MB-432S, HCT116, Panc-1, and AsPC-1) at low μM concentrations, but 
does not inhibit growth of a leukemia cell (L1210) and the healthy cells (Vero 
and HPNE) at these concentrations. In vitro metabolic stability using rat liver 
microsomes indicated that a half-life (t 1/2) of APPB is sufficiently long 
(>60 min) for in vivo studies (PK/PD, safety profiles, and in vivo efficacy) 
using animal models. We have refined all steps in the previously reported 
synthesis for APPB for larger-scale. This article summarizes protocols of 
gram-scale synthesis of APPB and its physicochemical data, and a convenient 
DPAGT1 assay. •Remember that the abstract is what readers see first in 
electronic abstracting & indexing services.•This is the advertisement of your 
article. Make it interesting, and easy to be understood.•Be accurate and 
specific, keep it as brief as possible.

© 2019 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mex.2019.09.031
PMCID: PMC6812346
PMID: 31667130


741. Endocrinology. 1998 Sep;139(9):3752-62. doi: 10.1210/endo.139.9.6207.

Prolonged depletion of guanosine triphosphate induces death of insulin-secreting 
cells by apoptosis.

Li G(1), Segu VB, Rabaglia ME, Luo RH, Kowluru A, Metz SA.

Author information:
(1)Medical Service, Middleton Veterans Administration Hospital, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53705, USA. nmiligd@med2.nusstf.nus.sg

Inhibitors of IMP dehydrogenase, such as mycophenolic acid (MPA) and mizoribine, 
which deplete cellular GTP, are used clinically as immunosuppressive drugs. The 
prolonged effect of such agents on insulin-secreting beta-cells (HIT-T15 and 
INS-1) was investigated. Both MPA and mizoribine inhibited mitogenesis, as 
reflected by [3H]thymidine incorporation. Cell number, DNA and protein contents, 
and cell (metabolic) viability were decreased by about 30%, 60%, and 80% after 
treatment of HIT cells with clinically relevant concentrations (e.g. 1 
microg/ml) of MPA for 1, 2, and 4 days, respectively. Mizoribine (48 h) 
similarly induced the death of HIT cells. INS-1 cells also were damaged by 
prolonged MPA treatment. MPA-treated HIT cells displayed a strong and localized 
staining with a DNA-binding dye (propidium iodide), suggesting condensation and 
fragmentation of DNA, which were confirmed by detection of DNA laddering in 
multiples of about 180 bp. DNA fragmentation was observed after 24-h MPA 
treatment and was dose dependent (29%, 49%, and 70% of cells were affected after 
48-h exposure to 1, 3, and 10 microg/ml MPA, respectively). Examination of 
MPA-treated cells by electron microscopy revealed typical signs of apoptosis: 
condensed and marginated chromatin, apoptotic bodies, cytosolic vacuolization, 
and loss of microvilli. MPA-induced cell death was almost totally prevented by 
supplementation with guanosine, but not with adenosine or deoxyguanosine, 
indicating a specific effect of GTP depletion. An inhibitor of protein 
isoprenylation (lovastatin, 10-100 microM for 2-3 days) induced cell death and 
DNA degradation similar to those induced by sustained GTP depletion, suggesting 
a mediatory role of posttranslationally modified GTP-binding proteins. Indeed, 
impeding the function of G proteins of the Rho family (via glucosylation using 
Clostridium difficile toxin B), although not itself inducing apoptosis, 
potentiated cell death induced by MPA or lovastatin. These findings indicate 
that prolonged depletion of GTP induces beta-cell death compatible with 
apoptosis; this probably involves a direct impairment of GTP-dependent 
RNA-primed DNA synthesis, but also appears to be modulated by small GTP-binding 
proteins. Treatment of intact adult rat islets (the beta-cells of which 
replicate slowly) induced a modest, but definite, death by apoptosis over 1- to 
3-day periods. Thus, more prolonged use of the new generation of 
immunosuppressive agents exemplified by MPA might have deleterious effects on 
the survival of islet or pancreas grafts.

DOI: 10.1210/endo.139.9.6207
PMID: 9724027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


742. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1582-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M408172200. Epub 2004 
Nov 3.

Angiotensin II and epidermal growth factor induce cyclooxygenase-2 expression in 
intestinal epithelial cells through small GTPases using distinct signaling 
pathways.

Slice LW(1), Chiu T, Rozengurt E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, the CURE: 
Digestive Diseases Research Center, the Jonnson Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
University of California, Los Angeles 90095-1786, USA. lslice@mednet.ucla.edu

Colorectal carcinogenesis is a multistep process involving genetic mutations and 
alterations in rigorously controlled signaling pathways and gene expression that 
control intestinal epithelial cell proliferation, differentiation, and 
apoptosis. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is aberrantly expressed in premalignant 
adenomatous polyps and colorectal carcinomas and is associated with increased 
epithelial cell proliferation, decreased apoptosis, and increased cell 
invasiveness. Currently, knowledge of the regulation of expression of COX-2 by 
endogenous cell-surface receptors is inadequate. Recently, in a non-transformed 
rat intestinal epithelial cell line (IEC-18), we showed induction of cell 
proliferation and DNA synthesis by angiotensin II (Ang II) via the endogenous 
Ang II type 1 receptor (Chiu, T., Santiskulvong, C., and Rozengurt, E. (2003) 
Am. J. Physiol. 285, G1-G11). We report that Ang II potently stimulated 
expression of COX-2 mRNA and protein as an immediate-early gene response through 
the Ang II type 1 receptor, correlating with an increase in prostaglandin I2 
production. Ang II induced Cdc42 activation and filopodial formation. COX-2 
expression was induced by epidermal growth factor (EGF), which activated Rac 
with lamellipodial formation. Inhibition of small GTPases by Clostridium 
difficile toxin B blocked COX-2 expression by Ang II and EGF. Inhibition of ERK 
activation by U0126 or PD98059 significantly decreased EGF-dependent COX-2 
expression, but did not affect Ang II-dependent COX-2 expression. Conversely, 
inhibition of p38MAPK by SB202190 or PD169316 inhibited COX-2 expression by Ang 
II, but did not block COX-2 induction by EGF. Ang II caused Ca2+ mobilization. 
Inhibition of Ca2+ signaling by 2-aminobiphenyl borate blocked Ang II-dependent 
COX-2 expression. EGF did not induce Ca2+ mobilization, and 2-aminobiphenyl 
borate did not inhibit EGF-dependent COX-2 expression. Inhibition of COX-2 
expression correlated with inhibition of prostaglandin I2 production. Luciferase 
promoter assays showed that Ang II-dependent transcriptional activation of the 
COX-2 promoter was dependent on activation of small GTPases and p38(MAPK) and on 
Ca2+ signaling via the cAMP-responsive element/activating transcription factor 
cis-acting element.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M408172200
PMID: 15525649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]