Enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EHEC) are food-borne intestinal pathogens 
with a low infectious dose. Adhesion of some EHEC strains to epithelial cells is 
attributed, in part, to intimin, but other factors may be required for the 
intestinal colonizing ability of these bacteria. In order to identify additional 
adherence factors of EHEC, we generated transposon mutants of a clinical EHEC 
isolate of serotype O111:H-, which displayed high levels of adherence to 
cultured Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. One mutant was markedly deficient in 
CHO cell adherence, human red blood cell agglutination and autoaggregation. 
Sequence analysis of the gene disrupted in this mutant revealed a 9669 bp novel 
chromosomal open reading frame (ORF), which was designated efa1, for EHEC factor 
for adherence. efa1 displayed 28% amino acid identity with the predicted product 
of a recently described ORF from the haemolysin-encoding plasmid of EHEC 
O157:H7. The amino termini of the putative products of these two genes exhibit 
up to 38% amino acid similarity to Clostridium difficile toxins A and B. efa1 
occurred within a novel genetic locus, at least 15 kb in length, which featured 
a low G+C content, several insertion sequence homologues and a homologue of the 
Shigella flexneri enterotoxin ShET2. DNA probes prepared from different regions 
of efa1 hybridized with all of 116 strains of attaching-effacing E. coli (AEEC) 
of a variety of serotypes, including enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and EHEC, 
but with none of 91 non-AEEC strains. Nevertheless, efa1 was not required for 
the attachment-effacement phenotype, and the efa1 locus was not physically 
linked to the locus for enterocyte effacement (LEE) pathogenicity island, which 
is responsible for this phenotype in EPEC. These findings suggest that efa1 
encodes a novel virulence-associated determinant of AEEC, which contributes to 
the adhesive capacity of these bacteria.
