BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Evidence suggests that the intestinal actions of 
Clostridium difficile toxin A-stimulation of secretion and motility, and an 
acute inflammatory response-have a neurally mediated component.
METHODS: Direct intracellular electrophysiological recording of electrical and 
synaptic behaviour in enteric neurones was performed in the submucous plexus of 
guinea pig small intestine during exposure to the toxin.
RESULTS: Application of toxin A affected both the electrical behaviour of the 
neuronal cell bodies and inhibitory noradrenergic neurotransmission to the cell 
bodies. Altered electrical behaviour included depolarisation and increased 
excitability. Tetrodotoxin or a histamine H(2) receptor antagonist did not 
affect the depolarisation evoked by toxin A. Failure of the histamine antagonist 
to suppress the actions of toxin A is evidence that its actions were not 
mediated by degranulation of intramural mast cells. The action of toxin A on 
neurotransmission was suppression of inhibitory postsynaptic potentials evoked 
in the neuronal cell bodies by stimulation of sympathetic nerve fibres that 
synapsed with the cell bodies. The inhibitory postsynaptic potentials were 
mediated by norepinephrine (noradrenaline) acting at postsynaptic alpha 
adrenoceptors on the cell bodies. Hyperpolarising responses evoked in the cell 
bodies by micropressure application of norepinephrine were unaffected by toxin 
A. This fulfils criteria for a presynaptic inhibitory action of toxin A to 
suppress release of norepinephrine from sympathetic postganglionic axons.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that the neural component of the action of toxin A 
involves both direct excitation of enteric neurones and suppression of 
norepinephrine release from postganglionic sympathetic nerve fibres in the 
enteric nervous system.
