FcepsilonRI signaling in rat basophilic leukemia cells depends on 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase) and the small GTPase Rac. Here, we 
studied the functional relationship among PI3-kinase, its effector protein 
kinase B (PKB), and Rac using inhibitors of PI3-kinase and toxins inhibiting 
Rac. Wortmannin, an inhibitor of PI3-kinase, blocked FcepsilonRI-mediated 
tyrosine phosphorylation of phospholipase Cgamma, inositol phosphate formation, 
calcium mobilization, and secretion of hexosaminidase. Similarly, Clostridium 
difficile toxin B, which inactivates all Rho GTPases including Rho, Rac and 
Cdc42, and Clostridium sordellii lethal toxin, which inhibits Rac (possibly 
Cdc42) but not Rho, blocked these responses. Stimulation of the FcepsilonRI 
receptor induced a rapid increase in the GTP-bound form of Rac. Whereas toxin B 
inhibited the Rac activation, PI3-kinase inhibitors (wortmannin and LY294002) 
had no effect on activation of Rac. In line with this, wortmannin had no effect 
on tyrosine phosphorylation of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor Vav. 
Wortmannin, toxin B, and lethal toxin inhibited phosphorylation of PKB on 
Ser(473). Similarly, translocation of the pleckstrin homology domain of PKB 
tagged with the green fluorescent protein to the membrane, which was induced by 
activation of the FcepsilonRI receptor, was blocked by inhibitors of PI3-kinase 
and Rac inactivation. Our results indicate that in rat basophilic leukemia cells 
Rac and PI3-kinase regulate PKB and suggest that Rac is functionally located 
upstream and/or parallel of PI3-kinase/PKB in FcepsilonRI signaling.
