A potential therapy for antibiotic-associated pseudomembranous colitis is to 
bind Clostridium difficile toxins A and B using cholestyramine, a hydrophobic 
anion exchange medium. Frontal analysis in isotonic phosphate buffer was studied 
using post-column derivatization with o-phthalaldehyde, which gave a highly 
sensitive (> or =30 ng) flow-through analysis. Following load (1.5-3.0 microg 
toxin/3.6 mg), toxin A was bound at a slightly higher capacity than B, due to 
slower kinetics. A salt gradient eluted roughly 20% of bound toxin A with 0.6 M 
NaCl and toxin B with 1.1 M NaCl, hence toxin A showed weaker electrostatic 
affinity. The remainder of toxin A (65%) and some of toxin B (10% out of 50%) 
were eluted using a subsequent gradient to 60% acetonitrile in normal saline, 
which measured predominantly hydrophobic binding. Low and high affinity 
populations of both toxins were observed. Glycocholic acid or amino acids were 
competitive binders, although these components had little effect on the toxin A 
population bound primarily through ionic interactions. Competitive protein 
constituents in hamster cecal contents were also profiled. These results help to 
explain the variable clinical response in using cholestyramine to treat colitis. 
Using quaternary amine-polyhydroxymethacrylate (PHM) ion exchange 
chromatography, a trend for increased binding at higher pH was observed, 
especially for toxin A. Binding to strong cation exchange resins (sulfonate-PHM) 
was not observed. A range of reversed phase media retained both toxins, although 
recovery was very poor relative to protein standards. Size exclusion 
chromatography with light scattering detection showed that toxin B exists in 
different aggregation states, while toxin A remains monomeric.
