Activation of phospholipase D (PLD) is assumed to be one major pathway by which 
alpha(1)-adrenoceptors (alpha(1)ARs) induce hypertrophic responses in cardiac 
myocytes. Heterotrimeric G proteins, protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms, protein 
tyrosine kinases, monomeric GTPases of the ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) and Rho 
families, and as important cofactor phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate 
(PIP(2)) seem to participate in the G protein-coupled receptor dependent 
regulation of PLD. We therefore studied the role of these components in the 
coupling of alpha(1)ARs to PLD in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes (NRCM). 
Stimulation of alpha(1)ARs, most likely of the alpha(1A) subtype, by 
noradrenaline increased PLD activity three- to fourfold concomitant with the 
stimulation of phospholipase C (PLC). In contrast, the partial agonist 
phenylephrine stimulated PLC, but failed to increase PLD activity. The PLC and 
PLD responses were pertussis toxin insensitive and treatment of the cells with 
the G(q)-activating toxin of Pasteurella multocida stimulated both 
phospholipases about fourfold. Over-expression of the G(q)-and 
G(i)-type-specific regulator of G protein signalling RGS4 blunted 
alpha(1)AR-induced PLC and PLD stimulation. Ro 31-8220, known to inhibit 
Ca(2+)-dependent and -independent PKC isoforms, strongly inhibited PLD activity, 
whereas GÃ¶ 6976, known to inhibit preferentially Ca(2+)-dependent PKC isozymes, 
was without effect. The ARF signalling inhibitor brefeldin A, protein tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors and the Rho-inactivating toxin B of Clostridium difficile 
blunted alpha(1)AR-induced PLD stimulation and largely reduced the cellular 
PIP(2) content. In membranes of toxin B-treated NCRM, PLD activity was similarly 
reduced, but was fully restored by addition of exogenous PIP(2). We conclude, 
that alpha(1A)ARs stimulate PLD activity via a G(q/11)-PLCbeta-novel PKC 
isoform-dependent pathway in NRCM. ARF and Rho GTPases as well as protein 
tyrosine kinases contribute to PLD stimulation in NRCM, most likely by 
regulating the supply of PIP(2).
