Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens are anaerobic, Gram-positive 
bacilli that are common causes of enteritis and enterotoxemias in both domestic 
animals and humans. Both organisms have been associated with acute and chronic 
large and small bowel diarrhea, and acute hemorrhagic diarrheal syndrome in the 
dog. The objective of this study was to determine the in vitro antimicrobial 
susceptibilities of canine C. difficile and C. perfringens isolates in an effort 
to optimize antimicrobial therapy for dogs with clostridial-associated diarrhea. 
The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of antibiotics recommended for 
treating C. difficile (metronidazole, vancomycin) and C. perfringens-associated 
diarrhea in the dog (ampicillin, erythromycin, metronidazole, tetracycline, 
tylosin) were determined for 70 canine fecal C. difficile isolates and 131 C. 
perfringens isolates. All C. difficile isolates tested had an MIC of <or=1 for 
both metronidazole and vancomycin. Ninety-five percent (124/131) of C. 
perfringens isolates tested had an MIC for ampicillin of <or=0.125 microg/ml. 
Two C. perfringens isolates had an MIC of >or=256 microg/ml for both 
erythromycin and tylosin. A third C. perfringens isolate had an MIC of 32 
microg/ml for metronidazole. Based on the results of this study, ampicillin, 
erythromycin, metronidazole, and tylosin appear to be effective antibiotics for 
the treatment of C. perfringens-associated diarrhea, although resistant strains 
do exist. However, because there is limited information regarding breakpoints 
for veterinary anaerobes, and because intestinal concentrations are not known, 
in vitro results should be interpreted with caution.
