Although vancomycin and metronidazole effectively treat Clostridium 
difficile-associated diarrhea and colitis (CDAD), their use is associated with a 
high incidence of relapsing C. difficile infection. Rifalazil is a new 
benzoxazinorifamycin that possesses activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis 
and gram-positive bacteria. Here we compared rifalazil and vancomycin for 
effectiveness in preventing or treating clindamycin-induced cecitis in a hamster 
model of CDAD. Golden Syrian hamsters were injected subcutaneously with 
clindamycin phosphate (10 mg/kg), followed 24 h later by C. difficile gavage. 
Hamsters received by gavage for 5 days vehicle, vancomycin (50 mg/kg), or 
rifalazil (20 mg/kg) either simultaneously with (prophylactic protocol) or 24 h 
after C. difficile administration (treatment protocol). While all 
vehicle-administered animals became moribund within 48 h of C. difficile 
administration, no rifalazil- or vancomycin-treated animals in either protocol 
showed signs of morbidity after 7 days. Ceca of rifalazil-treated animals showed 
absence of epithelial cell damage, significantly reduced congestion and edema, 
and less, but not statistically significantly less, neutrophil infiltration 
compared to those of vehicle-treated animals. In contrast, vancomycin-treated 
animals demonstrated severe epithelial cell damage and mildly reduced congestion 
and edema. Moreover, hamsters relapsed and tested C. difficile toxin positive 
(by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) 10 to 15 days after discontinuation of 
vancomycin treatment. None of the rifalazil-treated hamsters showed signs of 
disease or presence of toxins in their feces 30 days after discontinuation of 
treatment. Our results indicate that once daily rifalazil may be superior to 
vancomycin for curative treatment of CDAD.
