Saccharomyces boulardii (Sb), a probiotic yeast, protects against intestinal 
injury and inflammation caused by a wide variety of enteric pathogens, including 
Clostridium difficile. Given the broad range of protective effects of Sb in 
multiple gastrointestinal disorders, we hypothesize that Sb modulates host 
signaling pathways involved in intestinal inflammatory responses. In this study, 
we found that Sb culture supernatant (SbS) inhibits interleukin-8 production 
induced by C. difficile toxin A or IL-1beta in human colonocyte NCM460 cells in 
a dose-dependent fashion. Furthermore, SbS inhibited IL-1beta and toxin A 
induced Erk1/2 and JNK/SAPK but not p38 activation in NCM460 cells. To test 
whether this inhibition also occurs in vivo, we used a previously established 
mouse ileal loop model. On its own, SbS had no significant effect on basal fluid 
secretion or intestinal histology. However, Erk1/2 activation was significantly 
inhibited by SbS in toxin A exposed mouse ileal mucosa. In control loops, toxin 
A increased fluid secretion (2.2-fold), histological score (3.3-fold), and 
levels of the chemokine KC (4.5-fold). SbS pretreatment completely normalized 
toxin A mediated fluid secretion (p < 0.01), and histopathologic changes (p < 
0.01) and substantially inhibited toxin A-associated KC increases (p < 0.001). 
In summary, the probiotic yeast S. boulardii inhibits C. difficile toxin 
A-associated enteritis by blocking the activation of Erk1/2 MAP kinases. This 
study indicates a new mechanism whereby Sb protects against intestinal 
inflammation and supports the hypothesis that Sb modulates host inflammatory 
signaling pathways to exert its beneficial effects.
