Glucosylation of RhoA, Rac1, and Cdc42 by Clostridium difficile toxin B from 
strain VPI 10463 (TcdB) results in actin reorganization (cytopathic effect) and 
apoptosis (cytotoxic effect). Toxin B from variant C. difficile strain 1470 
serotype F (TcdBF) differs from TcdB with regard to substrate proteins, as it 
glucosylates Rac1 and R-Ras but not RhoA and Cdc42. In this study, we addressed 
the question of whether the cellular effects of the toxins depend on their 
protein substrate specificity. Rat basophilic leukemia (RBL) cells were 
synchronized using the thymidine double-block technique. We show that cells were 
most sensitive to the cytotoxic effect of TcdB in S phase, as analyzed in terms 
of phosphatidyl serine externalization, fragmentation of nuclei, and activation 
of caspase-3; in contrast, TcdBF induced only a marginal cytotoxic effect, 
suggesting that inactivation of RhoA (but not of Rac1) was required for the 
cytotoxic effect. The glucosylation of Rac1 was correlated to the cytopathic 
effect of either toxin, suggesting a close connection of the two effects. The 
cytotoxic effect of TcdB was executed by caspase-3, as it was responsive to 
inhibition by acetyl-Asp-Met-Gln-Asp-aldehyde (Ac-DMQD-CHO), an inhibitor of 
caspase-3. The viability of TcdB-treated RBL cells was reduced, whereas the 
viability of TcdBF-treated cells was unchanged, further confirming that 
inactivation of RhoA is required for the cytotoxic effect. In conclusion, the 
protein substrate specificity of the glucosylating toxins determines their 
biological activity.
