Clostridium difficile-associated colitis is an increasing cause of morbidity and 
mortality in hospitalized patients, with high relapse rates following 
conventional therapy. We sought to determine the efficacy of rifaximin, a novel 
nonabsorbed antibiotic, in the hamster model of C. difficile-associated diarrhea 
(CDAD). Hamsters received clindamycin subcutaneously and 24 h later were 
infected by gavage with one of two C. difficile strains: a reference strain (VPI 
10463) and a current epidemic strain (BI17). Vancomycin (50 mg/kg of body 
weight) or rifaximin (100, 50, and 25 mg/kg) were then administered orally for 5 
days beginning either on the same day as infection (prevention) or 24 h later 
(treatment). Therapeutic effects were assessed by weight gain, histology, and 
survival. We found that rifaximin was as effective as vancomycin in the 
prevention and treatment of colitis associated with the two C. difficile strains 
that we examined. There was no relapse after treatment with vancomycin or 
rifaximin in hamsters infected with the BI17 strain. Hamsters infected with the 
VPI 10463 strain and treated with rifaximin did not develop relapsing infection 
within a month of follow-up, whereas the majority of vancomycin-treated animals 
relapsed (0% versus 75%, respectively; P < 0.01). In conclusion, rifaximin was 
found to be an effective prophylactic and therapeutic agent for CDAD in hamsters 
and was not associated with disease recurrence. These findings, in conjunction 
with the pharmacokinetic and safety profiles of rifaximin, suggest that it is an 
attractive candidate for clinical use for CDAD.
