Current therapies for Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) are encumbered by 
treatment failures and recurrences. Due to its high in vitro activity against C. 
difficile but low activity against the typical intestinal flora, minimal 
absorption, and durable cure in the hamster model of C. difficile infection, 
OPT-80 was considered for clinical development as a therapy for CDI. This trial 
consisted of two phases. Four single oral doses of OPT-80 (100, 200, 300, and 
450 mg) were administered in a crossover manner to 16 healthy volunteers in a 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 1A study; a 1- to 2-week washout interval 
separated the treatments. In the double-blind phase 1B study, 24 healthy 
subjects were randomized to receive OPT-80 (150, 300, or 450 mg) or placebo for 
10 days. In both studies, OPT-80's safety and tolerability were evaluated and 
the concentrations of OPT-80 and its primary metabolite (OP-1118) in plasma and 
feces were determined. OPT-80 levels in the urine were also analyzed for the 
phase 1A study. In both the single-dose and the multiple-dose studies, OPT-80 
was well tolerated by all subjects in all dose groups. Maximal plasma 
concentrations were near or below the limit of quantification (5 ng/ml) across 
the dose range; urine concentrations were below the detection limit. The fecal 
total recovery of OPT-80 plus its major metabolite, OP-1118, approximated 100%. 
The tolerability, high fecal concentration, and low systemic exposure data from 
these studies support the further clinical development of OPT-80 as an oral 
therapy for CDI.
