AIMS: Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation contributes to intima 
formation after angioplasty or venous by-pass grafting, and during 
atherosclerosis. VSMC proliferation requires degradation of p27(Kip1) promoted 
by S-phase kinase-associated protein-2 (Skp2), an F-box protein component of the 
Skp-Cullin-F-box(Skp2) ubiquitin-ligase. We investigated the role of Rac(1) in 
the regulation of Skp2 in rat VSMC.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rat carotid balloon injury increased Rac(1) activity. Rho 
GTPase inhibition with Clostridium difficile Toxin B or specific Rac(1) 
inhibition with adenovirus-mediated expression of dominant-negative Rac(1) 
reduced Skp2 levels, and VSMC proliferation in vitro and intima formation in 
vivo following carotid balloon injury. Inhibition of Skp2 expression and 
proliferation by dominant-negative Rac(1) was reversed by exogenous Skp2. 
Elevation of endogenous adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) with 
forskolin-inhibited Rac(1) activity, reduced Skp2, increased p27(Kip1) and 
inhibited VSMC proliferation, effects that were reversed by constitutively 
active Rac(1). These effects were independent of Rac(1) Cdc42/Rac interactive 
binding (CRIB)-domain effector proteins but associated with Rac(1)-dependent 
actin polymerization.
CONCLUSION: Rac(1) activity regulates VSMC proliferation by controlling Skp2 
levels. Activation of Rac(1) induced by balloon injury in vivo increases Skp2 
levels, which promotes VSMC proliferation and intima formation. Inhibition of 
this novel pathway underlies the negative effects of cAMP on VSMC proliferation.
