This study was undertaken to determine if the relative resistance of neonates 
and infants to Clostridium difficile-associated intestinal disease can be 
related to age-dependent differences in intestinal receptors for C. difficile 
toxins A and B. Brush border membranes (BBMs) from the small intestines of adult 
and infant hamsters were examined for their ability to bind radiolabeled toxins 
A and B. [125I]toxin A bound to both infant and adult hamster BBMs at 
physiological temperature, whereas [125I]toxin B did not bind to the BBMs under 
any of the conditions examined. The number of [125I]toxin A molecules bound at 
saturation was approximately 4 x 10(10) per micrograms of membrane protein for 
adult BBMs and 1 x 10(11) per micrograms of membrane protein for infant BBMs. 
Scatchard plot analysis suggested the presence of a single class of toxin A 
binding sites on both infant and adult hamster BBMs. Maximal binding capacity 
and Kd values were 0.63 pmol/mg of protein and 66.7 nM, respectively, for the 
infant BBMs, and 0.24 pmol/mg of protein and 27 nM, respectively, for the adult 
BBMs. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoretic analyses of 
extracted BBM proteins revealed differences in the proteins of infant and adult 
BBMs. However, there were not any detectable differences in the protein bands 
which bound [125I]toxin A between infant and adult hamsters. The results from 
these investigations indicate that differences in the binding kinetics of toxins 
A and/or B to infant and adult hamster BBMs do not account for the observed 
differences in their susceptibility to C. difficile-associated intestinal 
disease.
