OBJECTIVES: REP3123 is a fully synthetic methionyl-tRNA synthetase inhibitor in 
pre-clinical development as a novel agent to treat Clostridium difficile 
infection (CDI). This novel agent was investigated for its ability to block the 
production of toxins and spores, and was tested for efficacy in vivo in a 
hamster model.
METHODS: Clostridial toxin levels were determined qualitatively using monoclonal 
antibodies and by cytotoxicity assays. Spores were detected by staining and by 
quantitative dilution plating after ethanol treatment. Efficacy of REP3123 was 
tested in a clindamycin-induced C. difficile hamster gastrointestinal (GI) 
infection model.
RESULTS: REP3123 at concentrations as low as 1 mg/L inhibited de novo toxin 
production in high cell density, stationary phase cultures of C. difficile. 
Among comparator agents currently used for CDI therapy, vancomycin required much 
higher levels of 20 mg/L, and metronidazole had no effect on toxin levels. 
REP3123 caused a >10-fold reduction of the sporulation rate in vitro. Vancomycin 
and, in particular, metronidazole appeared to promote the formation of spores. 
REP3123, at concentrations as low as 0.5 mg/kg, demonstrated efficacy in the 
hamster model of CDI and was superior to vancomycin in the overall survival of 
the animals at the end of the study (33 days).
CONCLUSIONS: REP3123 inhibited growth of C. difficile, affected the production 
of toxins and spores and demonstrated superior efficacy compared with vancomycin 
in the hamster GI infection model. This agent may be a promising candidate for 
CDI treatment; in particular, the inhibition of toxin production and spore 
formation may reduce the severity and spread of the disease, respectively.
