The gastrointestinal environment is a complex interactive system involving the 
host, ingested dietary components, and numerous microbial species. We 
hypothesized that isolation and screening of Lactobacilli and Bifidobacteria 
adherent to healthy canine gastrointestinal tissue would yield strains with 
commensal activity in canines. The aims of this study were (1) to isolate a bank 
of commensal organisms from the canine gastrointestinal tract; (2) to screen 
these novel microbial isolates for potential probiotic effects; (3) to select 
one organism from these screens and test its impact on the canine microbiota. 
Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) were isolated from resected canine gastrointestinal 
tissue and screened in vitro for putative probiotic activities. Murine studies 
examined gastrointestinal transit and inhibition of Salmonella typhimurium 
translocation. One strain was progressed to a canine study where its impact on 
the gastrointestinal microbiota was determined. Of the 420 isolates from the 
canine gut, 62 strains were characterised as LAB. Following assessment of the 
strain bank with regard to pH sensitivity, bile resistance, pathogen inhibition 
and survival following freeze-drying, four Lactobacillus strains and two 
Bifidobacteria strains were selected for further examination. Bifidobacterium 
animalis AHC7 adhered to epithelial cells, transited the murine gastrointestinal 
tract to high numbers and significantly reduced S. typhimurium translocation. B. 
animalis AHC7 consumption significantly reduced the carriage of Clostridia, in 
particular Clostridium difficile, in dogs. This study describes the isolation 
and screening of canine-derived bacterial strains with commensal traits. The 
results demonstrate that B. animalis AHC7 has significant potential for 
improving canine gastrointestinal health.
