Although human consumption of Bacillus polyfermenticus provides several health 
benefits, the probiotic effect of this bacterium against colonic inflammation 
has not yet, to our knowledge, been studied. Therefore, we induced colitis in 
mice by oral or intrarectal administration of dextran sodium sulfate (DSS) or 
trinitrobenzenosulfonic acid (TNBS), respectively, and investigated the effect 
of B. polyfermenticus on colitis. We found that mice treated with DSS or TNBS 
along with B. polyfermenticus had reduced mortality and severity of colitis 
(weight loss, diarrhea, and mucosal damages) than mice treated with DSS or TNBS 
alone. B. polyfermenticus also reduced the expression of inflammatory molecules, 
including chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1, intercellular adhesion molecule, and 
tumor necrosis factor-alpha, but enhanced the expression of the antiinflammatory 
cytokine interleukin-10 in the inflamed mouse colon. Moreover, B. 
polyfermenticus suppressed apoptosis both in vivo in inflamed colonic mucosa and 
in vitro in colonic epithelial cells stimulated with apoptosis-inducing agents 
(FasL or Clostridium difficile Toxin A) when the apoptotic response was 
determined by a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling 
assay and cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase or caspase-3, respectively. 
Treating colonic epithelial cells with B. polyfermenticus-conditioned medium 
(BPCM) enhanced cell proliferation and induced the phosphoinositide 
3-kinases/Akt signaling pathway, suggesting that this bacterium can promote 
epithelial cell proliferation. BPCM also promoted the migration of colonic 
epithelial cells. These data suggest that B. polyfermenticus ameliorates colonic 
inflammation by suppressing apoptosis and promoting epithelial cell 
proliferation and migration.
