Clostridium difficile is a major and growing problem as a hospital-associated 
infection that can cause severe, recurrent diarrhea. The mechanism by which the 
bacterium colonizes the gut during infection is poorly understood but 
undoubtedly involves protein components within the surface layer (S-layer), 
which play a role in adhesion. In C. difficile, the S-layer is composed of two 
principal components, the high and low molecular weight S-layer proteins, which 
are formed from the post-translational cleavage of a single precursor, SlpA. In 
the present study, we demonstrate that a recently characterized cysteine 
protease, Cwp84 plays a role in maturation of SlpA. Using a gene knock-out 
approach, we show that inactivation of the Cwp84 gene in C. difficile 
630DeltaErm results in a bacterial phenotype in which only immature, single 
chain SlpA comprises the S-layer. The Cwp84 knock-out mutants (CDDeltaCwp84) 
displayed significantly different colony morphology compared with the wild-type 
strain and grew more slowly in liquid medium. SlpA extracted from CDDeltaCwp84 
was readily cleaved into its mature subunits by trypsin treatment. Addition of 
trypsin to the growth medium also cleaved SlpA on CDDeltaCwp84 and increased the 
growth rate of the bacterium in a dose-dependent manner. Using the hamster model 
for C. difficile infection, CDDeltaCwp84 was found to be competent at causing 
disease with a similar pathology to the wild-type strain. The data show that 
whereas Cwp84 plays a role in the cleavage of SlpA, it is not an essential 
virulence factor and that bacteria expressing immature SlpA are able to cause 
disease.
