AIM: Clostridium difficile is the most common agent of postantibiotic and 
nosocomial bacterial diarrhoea. Since the emergence of the highly virulent and 
epidemic strain NAP1/027 in Europe, it appears necessary to isolate C. difficile 
strains to realize an epidemiologic follow-up by molecular typing. The aim of 
this work was to compare three selective culture conditions for the isolation of 
C. difficile.
METHODS: One hundred and thirty stools collected from patients hospitalized at 
Jean Verdier were swabbed on the commercial medium CLO (BioMÃ©rieux) and on a 
medium prepared at the laboratory (CCTa: Columbia, cefoxitine 8 mg/l, 
cycloserine 250 mg/l, horse blood 5 %, sodium taurocholate 0.1 %) with and 
without preliminary alcoholic shock (EtOH). C. difficile was isolated from 38 
stools and colonies were counted on each medium.
RESULTS: The fluorescence intensity of C. difficile colonies is comparable on 
CLO and CCTa-EtOH media, however their aspect is more characteristic on CLO. 
This medium appears very selective contrary to the CCTa medium on which an 
associated flora obstructs the fluorescence reading and requires a new isolation 
of the suspect strains. On average 30 times more colonies of C. difficile are 
counted on CCTa+/-EtOH than on CLO, suggesting the presence of great proportions 
of spores in the stools.
CONCLUSIONS: The medium CLO is successful for the isolation of C. difficile 
despite of its selectivity. Nevertheless, it appears interesting to associate a 
medium enhancing spore germination as the CCTa medium inoculated after alcoholic 
shock to increase the sensitivity of detection while being freed from 
conservation and transport conditions.
