Clostridium difficile (CD), Salmonella, Campylobacter and enterohemorrhagic 
Escherichia coli (EHEC) are major causes of morbidity in a variety of enteric 
diseases in humans and animals, but subclinical carriage in both is probably 
more common than are clinical cases. Little is known regarding the prevalence of 
these pathogens in animals raised for exhibit at Michigan county fairs or the 
frequency with which Michigan citizens raising these animals may have been 
subclinically colonized. To address these issues, 361 fecal specimens from 158 
humans and 203 of their farm animals were cultured for CD, Salmonella and 
Campylobacter. Additionally, 50 people and their cattle were tested for EHEC. No 
EHEC, Salmonella or Campylobacter were detected. However, 16 specimens (4.4%) 
were positive for CD: 13 humans, two horses and one pig. None of the farm animal 
specimens submitted by any of the 13 CD-positive humans were positive for CD. 
Strain characterization [toxinotype, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE)] 
demonstrated that the human CD isolates were similar to what has been reported 
previously in the general US population. We conclude that horses and farm 
animals (cattle, sheep, goats and swine) at 1-2â€ƒmonths before market weight 
showed no evidence of wide-spread carriage of the common enteric pathogens, 
including the recently reported CD toxinotype V. These results provide no 
support to the hypothesis that 4-H members or others visiting county fair animal 
husbandry projects in these counties may be at increased risk for acquisition of 
CD, Salmonella, Campylobacter or EHEC from animals.
