Subsequent to myocardial infarction, cardiomyocytes within the infarcted areas 
and border zones expose phosphatidylserine (PS) in the outer plasma membrane 
leaflet (flip-flop). We showed earlier that in addition to apoptosis, this 
flip-flop can be reversible in cardiomyocytes. We now investigated a possible 
role for Rho and downstream effector Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) in the process 
of (reversible) PS exposure and apoptosis in cardiomyocytes. In rat 
cardiomyoblasts (H9c2 cells) and isolated adult ventricular rat cardiomyocytes 
Clostridium difficile Toxin B (TcdB), a Rho GTPase family inhibitor, C3 
transferase (C3), a Rho(A,B,C) inhibitor and the ROCK inhibitors Y27632 and 
H1152 were used to inhibit Rho-ROCK signaling. PS exposure was assessed via flow 
cytometry and fluorescent digital imaging microscopy using annexin V. Akt 
expression and phosphorylation were analyzed via Western blot, and Akt activity 
was inhibited by wortmannin. The cellular concentration activated caspase 3 was 
determined as a measure of apoptosis, and flippase activity was assessed via 
flow cytometry using NBD-labeled PS. TcdB, C3, Y27632 and H1152 all 
significantly increased PS exposure. TcdB, Y27632 and H1152 all significantly 
inhibited phosphorylation of the anti-apoptotic protein Akt and Akt inhibition 
by wortmannin lead to increased PS exposure. However, only TcdB and C3, but not 
ROCK- or Akt inhibition led to caspase 3 activation and thus apoptosis. Notably, 
pancaspase inhibitor zVAD only partially inhibited TcdB-induced PS exposure 
indicating the existence of apoptotic and non-apoptotic PS exposure. The induced 
PS exposure coincided with decreased flippase activity as measured with 
NBD-labeled PS flip-flop. In this study, we show a regulatory role for a novel 
signaling route, Rho-ROCK-flippase signaling, in maintaining asymmetrical 
membrane phospholipid distribution in cardiomyocytes.
