Clostridium difficile is the main cause of antibiotic-associated disease, a 
disease of high socio-economical importance that has recently been compounded by 
the global spread of the 027 (BI/NAP1/027) ribotype. C. difficile cases 
attributed to ribotype 027 strains have high recurrence rates (up to 36 %) and 
increased disease severity. The hamster model of infection is widely accepted as 
an appropriate model for studying aspects of C. difficile host-pathogen 
interactions. Using this model we characterized the infection kinetics of the UK 
2006 outbreak strain, R20291. Hamsters were orally given a dose of clindamycin, 
followed 5 days later with 10, 000 C. difficile spores. All 100 % of the 
hamsters succumbed to infection with a mean time to the clinical end point of 
46.7 h. Colonization of the caecum and colon were observed 12 h post-infection 
reaching a maximum of approximately 3×10(4) c.f.u. per organ, but spores were 
not detected until 24 h post-infection. At 36 h post-infection C. difficile 
numbers increased significantly to approximately 6×10(7) c.f.u. per organ where 
numbers remained high until the clinical end point. Increasing levels of in vivo 
toxin production coincided with increases in C. difficile numbers in organs 
reaching a maximum at 36 h post-infection in the caecum. Epithelial destruction 
and polymorphonuclear leukocyte (PMN) recruitment occurred early on during 
infection (24 h) accumulating as gross microvilli damage, luminal PMN influx, 
and blood associated with mucosal muscle and microvilli. These data describe the 
fatal infection kinetics of the clinical UK epidemic C. difficile strain R20291 
in the hamster infection model.
