OBJECTIVES: RBx 11760, a novel oxazolidinone, was investigated for in vitro and 
in vivo activity against Clostridium difficile.
METHODS: The in vitro activity of RBx 11760 and three other agents against 50 
diverse C. difficile clinical isolates and other obligate anaerobic bacteria was 
determined. The effect of RBx 11760 on sporulation and toxin production was 
determined against different C. difficile isolates. We used a hamster infection 
model to investigate the efficacy of RBx 11760, vancomycin and metronidazole. 
The mechanism of action of RBx 11760 against C. difficile ATCC 43255 was 
determined by macromolecular synthesis inhibition.
RESULTS: RBx 11760 MICs were in the range of 0.5-1 mg/L for C. difficile 
isolates, and it demonstrated concentration-dependent killing of C. difficile 
ATCC 43255 and C. difficile 6387 up to 2-4Ã— MIC (1-2 mg/L). RBx 11760, at 
concentrations as low as 0.25-0.5 mg/L, resulted in a significant reduction in 
de novo toxin production as well as sporulation in different C. difficile 
isolates. In contrast, vancomycin, metronidazole and linezolid had little or no 
effect on toxin production and appeared to promote the formation of spores. In 
the hamster infection model, treatment with RBx 11760 resulted in prolonged 
survival of animals as compared with vancomycin or metronidazole, which 
correlated well with the histopathology results. Macromolecular labelling 
results suggest that RBx 11760 is a potent inhibitor of bacterial protein 
synthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: RBx 11760 showed excellent in vitro and in vivo activity against C. 
difficile, and it could be a promising novel candidate for future drug 
development against C. difficile infection.
