A slide agglutination technique identifying 10 serogroups of Clostridium 
difficile (A,B,C,D,F,G,H,I,K and X) has been described previously. In this 
study, we have used the hamster to compare the ability of the 10 serogroup 
reference strains to colonise and produce disease. Groups of four hamsters were 
each given a single intraperitoneal injection of either clindamycin or 
cefoxitin, and an oral challenge dose of C. difficile. The time taken to 
establish faecal colonisation and the length of survival after colonisation were 
monitored. All hamsters treated with cefoxitin became colonised by day 3 and 
those challenged with the cytotoxigenic strains of serogroups A,C,H and K 
developed colitis and died. Among those challenged with the non-toxigenic 
strains of groups B,D,I and X and the toxigenic strains of groups F and G, 
faecal colonisation was established without signs of disease. This demonstrates 
that there are differences in virulence even among toxigenic strains of C. 
difficile. The same phenomenon was observed after treatment with clindamycin but 
the pattern of colonisation was quite different with some strains. In the 
hamsters challenged with toxigenic strains of groups C and K and non-toxigenic 
strains of groups D and I, which are highly resistant to clindamycin, the 
response was the same as with cefoxitin. The results were different with strains 
which were susceptible to clindamycin. Some animals became colonised much later 
than those treated with cefoxitin but the mortality was similar.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)
