Clostridium difficile, a major cause of hospital-acquired diarrhea, triggers 
disease through the release of two toxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB). 
These toxins disrupt the cytoskeleton of the intestinal epithelial cell, 
increasing intestinal permeability and triggering the release of inflammatory 
mediators resulting in intestinal injury and inflammation. The most prevalent 
animal model to study TcdA/TcdB-induced intestinal injury involves injecting 
toxin into the lumen of a surgically generated "ileal loop." This model is 
time-consuming and exhibits variability depending on the expertise of the 
surgeon. Furthermore, the target organ of C. difficile infection (CDI) in humans 
is the colon, not the ileum. In the current study, we describe a new model of 
CDI that involves intrarectal instillation of TcdA/TcdB into the mouse colon. 
The administration of TcdA/TcdB triggered colonic inflammation and neutrophil 
and macrophage infiltration as well as increased epithelial barrier permeability 
and intestinal epithelial cell death. The damage and inflammation triggered by 
TcdA/TcdB isolates from the VPI and 630 strains correlated with the 
concentration of TcdA and TcdB produced. TcdA/TcdB exposure increased the 
expression of a number of inflammatory mediators associated with human CDI, 
including interleukin-6 (IL-6), gamma interferon (IFN-γ), and IL-1β. Finally, we 
were able to demonstrate that TcdA was much more potent at inducing colonic 
injury than was TcdB but TcdB could act synergistically with TcdA to exacerbate 
injury. Taken together, our data indicate that the intrarectal murine model 
provides a robust and efficient system to examine the effects of TcdA/TcdB on 
the induction of inflammation and colonic tissue damage in the context of human 
CDI.
