Antibiotic disruption of the intestinal microbiota may cause susceptibility to 
pathogens that is resolved by progressive bacterial outgrowth and colonization. 
Succession is central to ecological theory but not widely documented in studies 
of the vertebrate microbiome. Here, we study succession in the hamster gut after 
treatment with antibiotics and exposure to Clostridium difficile. C. difficile 
infection is typically lethal in hamsters, but protection can be conferred with 
neutralizing antibodies against the A and B toxins. We compare treatment with 
neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAb) to treatment with vancomycin, which 
prolongs the lives of animals but ultimately fails to protect them from death. 
We carried out longitudinal deep sequencing analysis and found distinctive waves 
of succession associated with each form of treatment. Clindamycin sensitization 
prior to infection was associated with the temporary suppression of the 
previously dominant Bacteroidales and the fungus Saccinobaculus in favor of 
Proteobacteria. In mAb-treated animals, C. difficile proliferated before joining 
Proteobacteria in giving way to re-expanding Bacteroidales and the fungus 
Wickerhamomyces. However, the Bacteroidales lineages returning by day 7 were 
different from those that were present initially, and they persisted for the 
duration of the experiment. Animals treated with vancomycin showed a different 
set of late-stage lineages that were dominated by Proteobacteria as well as 
increased disparity between the tissue-associated and luminal cecal communities. 
The control animals showed no change in their gut microbiota. These data thus 
suggest different patterns of ecological succession following antibiotic 
treatment and C. difficile infection.
