Clostridium difficile is an anaerobic bacterium that has re-emerged as a 
facultative pathogen and can cause nosocomial diarrhea, colitis or even death. 
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) γ has been implicated in the 
prevention of inflammation in autoimmune and infectious diseases; however, its 
role in the immunoregulatory mechanisms modulating host responses to C. 
difficile and its toxins remains largely unknown. To characterize the role of 
PPARγ in C. difficile-associated disease (CDAD), immunity and gut pathology, we 
used a mouse model of C. difficile infection in wild-type and T cell-specific 
PPARγ null mice. The loss of PPARγ in T cells increased disease activity and 
colonic inflammatory lesions following C. difficile infection. Colonic 
expression of IL-17 was upregulated and IL-10 downregulated in colons of T 
cell-specific PPARγ null mice. Also, both the loss of PPARγ in T cells and C. 
difficile infection favored Th17 responses in spleen and colonic lamina propria 
of mice with CDAD. MicroRNA (miRNA)-sequencing analysis and RT-PCR validation 
indicated that miR-146b was significantly overexpressed and nuclear receptor 
co-activator 4 (NCOA4) suppressed in colons of C. difficile-infected mice. We 
next developed a computational model that predicts the upregulation of miR-146b, 
downregulation of the PPARγ co-activator NCOA4, and PPARγ, leading to 
upregulation of IL-17. Oral treatment of C. difficile-infected mice with the 
PPARγ agonist pioglitazone ameliorated colitis and suppressed pro-inflammatory 
gene expression. In conclusion, our data indicates that miRNA-146b and PPARγ 
activation may be implicated in the regulation of Th17 responses and colitis in 
C. difficile-infected mice.
