Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) has been identified as the leading cause 
of nosocomial diarrhoea and pseudomembranous colitis associated with antibiotic 
therapy. Recent epidemiological changes as well as increases in the number of 
outbreaks of strains associated with increased virulence and higher mortality 
rates underscore the importance of identifying alternatives to antibiotics to 
manage this important disease. Animal studies have clearly demonstrated the 
roles that toxins A and B play in gut inflammation as well as diarrhoea; 
therefore it is not surprising that serum anti-toxin A and B IgG are associated 
with protection against recurrent CDI. In humans, strong humoral toxin-specific 
immune responses elicited by natural C. difficile infection is associated with 
recovery and lack of disease recurrence, whereas insufficient humoral responses 
are associated with recurrent CDI. The first generation of C. difficile vaccine 
that contained inactivated toxin A and B was found to be completely protective 
against death and diarrhoea in the hamster C. difficile challenge model. When 
tested in young healthy volunteers in Phase I clinical trials, this 
investigational vaccine was shown to be safe and immunogenic. Moreover, in a 
separate study this vaccine was able to prevent further relapses in three out of 
three patients who had previously suffered from chronic relapsing C. 
difficile-associated diarrhoea. Herein we examined the immunogenicity and 
protective activity of a next-generation Sanofi Pasteur two-component highly 
purified toxoid vaccine in a C. difficile hamster model. This model is widely 
recognized as a stringent and relevant choice for the evaluation of novel 
treatment strategies against C. difficile and was used in preclinical testing of 
the first-generation vaccine candidate. Intramuscular (i.m.) immunizations with 
increasing doses of this adjuvanted toxoid vaccine protected hamsters from 
mortality and disease symptoms in a dose-dependent manner. ELISA measurements of 
pre-challenge sera showed that the median anti-toxin A and anti-toxin B IgG 
titres in the group of surviving animals were significantly higher than the 
median values in the group of animals that did not survive challenge. Assessment 
of the neutralizing activity of these sera revealed a statistically significant 
difference between the levels of both toxin A and toxin B neutralizing titres in 
protected versus unprotected animals as the median anti-toxin A and anti-toxin B 
neutralizing titres from surviving animals were higher than the median values 
from animals that succumbed to challenge. Statistically significant correlations 
between the toxin-specific binding titres and toxin neutralizing titres were 
seen for both toxin A and toxin B responses. The role of circulating anti-toxin 
antibodies in immunity against disease was evaluated by passive transfer of 
immune sera against C. difficile toxoids to na√Øve hamsters. Passively immunized 
animals were protected against morbidity and mortality associated with C. 
difficile challenge. Taken together, these results indicate the ability of i.m. 
immunization with inactivated toxins A and B to induce robust dose-dependent 
anti-toxin A and anti-toxin B IgG responses, the principal role of circulating 
anti-toxin antibody in immunity against disease and that antibody toxin binding 
and neutralization titres can serve as correlates of protection in the hamster 
challenge model of C. difficile.
