Clostridium difficile is the most commonly associated cause of antibiotic 
associated disease (AAD), which caused âˆ¼21,000 cases of AAD in 2011 in the U.K. 
alone. The golden Syrian hamster model of CDI is an acute model displaying many 
of the clinical features of C. difficile disease. Using this model we 
characterised three clinical strains of C. difficile, all differing in 
toxinotype; CD1342 (PaLoc negative), M68 (toxinotype VIII) & BI-7 (toxinotype 
III). The naturally occurring non-toxic strain colonised all hamsters within 
1-day post challenge (d.p.c.) with high-levels of spores being shed in the 
faeces of animals that appeared well throughout the entire experiment. However, 
some changes including increased neutrophil influx and unclotted red blood cells 
were observed at early time points despite the fact that the known C. difficile 
toxins (TcdA, TcdB and CDT) are absent from the genome. In contrast, hamsters 
challenged with strain M68 resulted in a 45% mortality rate, with those that 
survived challenge remaining highly colonised. It is currently unclear why some 
hamsters survive infection, as bacterial & toxin levels and histology scores 
were similar to those culled at a similar time-point. Hamsters challenged with 
strain BI-7 resulted in a rapid fatal infection in 100% of the hamsters 
approximately 26 hr post challenge. Severe caecal pathology, including 
transmural neutrophil infiltrates and extensive submucosal damage correlated 
with high levels of toxin measured in gut filtrates ex vivo. These data 
describes the infection kinetics and disease outcomes of 3 clinical C. difficile 
isolates differing in toxin carriage and provides additional insights to the 
role of each toxin in disease progression.
