Changes in the intestinal microbiota have been linked to diabetes, obesity, 
inflammatory bowel disease, and Clostridium difficile (C. difficile)-associated 
disease. Despite this, it remains unclear how the intestinal environment, set by 
ion transport, affects luminal and mucosa-associated bacterial composition. 
Na(+)/H(+)-exchanger isoform 3 (NHE3), a target of C. difficile toxin B, plays 
an integral role in intestinal Na(+) absorption. Thus the NHE3-deficient mouse 
model was chosen to examine the effect of pH and ion composition on bacterial 
growth. We hypothesized that ion transport-induced change in the intestinal 
environment would lead to alteration of the microbiota. Region-specific changes 
in ion composition and pH correlated with region-specific alteration of luminal 
and mucosal-associated bacteria with general decreases in Firmicutes and 
increases in Bacteroidetes members. Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron (B. 
thetaiotaomicron) increased in NHE3(-/-) terminal ileum and was examined in 
vitro to determine whether altered Na(+) was sufficient to affect growth. 
Increased in vitro growth of B. thetaiotaomicron occurred in 43 mM Na(+) 
correlating with the NHE3(-/-) mouse terminal ileum [Na(+)]. NHE3(-/-) terminal 
ileum displayed increased fut2 mRNA and fucosylation correlating with B. 
thetaiotaomicron growth. Inoculation of B. thetaiotaomicron in wild-type and 
NHE3(-/-) terminal ileum organoids displayed increased fut2 and fucosylation, 
indicating that B. thetaiotaomicron alone is sufficient for the increased 
fucosylation seen in vivo. These data demonstrate that loss of NHE3 alters the 
intestinal environment, leading to region-specific changes in bacteria, and shed 
light on the growth requirements of some gut microbiota members, which is vital 
for creating better treatments of complex diseases with an altered gut 
microbiota.
