The objective of this study was to detect C. difficile A/B toxins and to isolate 
strains of C. perfringens and C. difficile from diarrheic and non-diarrheic dogs 
in Brazil. Stool samples were collected from 57 dogs, 35 of which were 
apparently healthy, and 22 of which were diarrheic. C. difficile A/B toxins were 
detected by ELISA, and C. perfringens and C. difficile were identified by 
multiplex PCR. C. difficile A/B toxins were detected in 21 samples (36.8%). Of 
these, 16 (76.2%) were from diarrheic dogs, and five (23.8%) were from 
non-diarrheic dogs. Twelve C. difficile strains (21.1%) were isolated, of which 
ten were A(+)B(+) and two were A(-)B(-). All non-toxigenic strains were isolated 
from non-diarrheic animals. The binary toxin gene cdtB was found in one strain, 
which was A(+)B(+) and was derived from a non-diarrheic dog. C. perfringens 
strains were isolated from 40 samples (70.2%). Of these, 18 (45%) were from the 
diarrheic group, and 22 (55%) belonged to the non-diarrheic group. All isolates 
were classified as C. perfringens type A and there was an association between 
the detection of the cpe gene and the presence of diarrhea. Interestingly, ten 
strains (25%) were positive for the presence of the cpb2 gene. The high rate of 
detection of the A/B toxins in non-diarrheic dogs suggests the occurrence of 
subclinical disease in dogs or carriage of its toxins without disease. More 
studies are needed to elucidate the epidemiology of C. difficile and C. 
perfringens in dogs and to better our understanding of C. difficile as a 
zoonotic agent. This is the first study to report the binary toxin gene in C. 
difficile strains isolated from dogs in Brazil.
