Clostridium difficile rivals methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus as the 
primary hospital-acquired infection. C. difficile infection (CDI) caused by 
toxins A and/or B can manifest as mild diarrhea to life-threatening 
pseudomembranous colitis. Although most patients recover fully from CDI, ~20% 
undergo recurrent disease. Several studies have demonstrated a correlation 
between anti-toxin antibody (Ab) and decreased recurrence; however, the 
contributions of the systemic and mucosal Ab responses remain unclear. Our goal 
was to use the CDI mouse model to characterize the protective immune response to 
C. difficile. C57BL/6 mice infected with epidemic C. difficile strain BI17 
developed protective immunity against CDI and did not develop CDI upon 
rechallenge; they generated systemic IgG and IgA as well as mucosal IgA Ab to 
toxin. To determine if protective immunity to C. difficile could be generated in 
immunodeficient individuals, we infected CD4(-/-) mice and found that they 
generated both mucosal and serum IgA anti-toxin Abs and were protected from CDI 
upon rechallenge, with protection dependent on major histocompatibility complex 
class II (MHCII) expression; no IgG anti-toxin Ab was found. We found that 
protection was likely due to neutralizing mucosal IgA Ab. In contrast, pIgR(-/-) 
mice, which lack the receptor to transcytose polymeric Ab across the epithelium, 
were also protected from CDI, suggesting that although mucosal anti-toxin Ab may 
contribute to protection, it is not required. We conclude that protection from 
CDI can occur by several mechanisms and that the mechanism of protection is 
determined by the state of immunocompetence of the host.
