Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive pathogen infecting humans and animals. 
Recent studies suggest that animals could represent potential reservoirs of C. 
difficile that could then transfer to humans. Temperate phages contribute to the 
evolution of most bacteria, for example, by promoting the transduction of 
virulence, fitness, and antibiotic resistance genes. In C. difficile, little is 
known about their role, mainly because suitable propagating hosts and conditions 
are lacking. Here we report the isolation, propagation, and preliminary 
characterization of nine temperate phages from animal and human C. difficile 
isolates. Prophages were induced by UV light from 58 C. difficile isolates of 
animal and human origins. Using soft agar overlays with 27 different C. 
difficile test strains, we isolated and further propagated nine temperate 
phages: two from horse isolates (ΦCD481-1 and ΦCD481-2), three from dog isolates 
(ΦCD505, ΦCD506, and ΦCD508), and four from human isolates (ΦCD24-2, ΦCD111, 
ΦCD146, and ΦCD526). Two phages are members of the Siphoviridae family (ΦCD111 
and ΦCD146), while the others are Myoviridae phages. Pulsed-field gel 
electrophoresis and restriction enzyme analyses showed that all of the phages 
had unique double-stranded DNA genomes of 30 to 60 kb. Phages induced from human 
C. difficile isolates, especially the members of the Siphoviridae family, had a 
broader host range than phages from animal C. difficile isolates. Nevertheless, 
most of the phages could infect both human and animal strains. Phage 
transduction of antibiotic resistance was recently reported in C. difficile. Our 
findings therefore call for further investigation of the potential risk of 
transduction between animal and human C. difficile isolates.
