Clostridium difficile toxins A and B were shown to share immunochemical and 
structural features, including shared sequential epitopes. Nineteen hybridomas 
generated after immunization of mice with a mixture of toxoids produced 
monoclonal antibodies, all IgM(x), which bound to toxin A and toxin B in a 
solid-phase radioimmunoassay (RIA). None of the antibodies neutralized the 
cytotoxicity of either toxin, alone or in pairs, nor did they neutralize mouse 
lethality. The antibodies did not inhibit hemagglutination by toxin A, and none 
of those tested neutralized the toxin's enterotoxic activity. Studies of binding 
of antibodies to native toxins in the RIA showed that the antibodies differed in 
their recognition of the toxins. Many of the antibodies bound with higher 
avidity to toxin A than to toxin B. In Western blots, all the antibodies 
recognized both toxins in the native state; in addition, some antibodies 
recognized the minor cytotoxic species of toxin B. When the toxins were 
denatured and reduced, five antibodies bound to both toxins, five to A only, and 
nine to neither, demonstrating that the antibodies had different epitope 
specificities. Further structural comparisons were made by investigation of mol. 
wts, subunit structures and amino acid compositions. The native mol. wts of 
toxin A and toxin B, as determined by electrophoresis to equilibrium in 4-30% 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE), were 430,000 and 368,000, 
respectively. Denatured and reduced toxins each had a single subunit of 315,000. 
Both toxins had about 50% hydrophobic amino acids.
