Little is known about cell division in Clostridium difficile, a strict anaerobe 
that causes serious diarrheal diseases in people whose normal intestinal 
microbiome has been perturbed by treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics. Here 
we identify and characterize a gene cluster encoding three cell division 
proteins found only in C. difficile and a small number of closely related 
bacteria. These proteins were named MldA, MldB, and MldC, for midcell localizing 
division proteins. MldA is predicted to be a membrane protein with coiled-coil 
domains and a peptidoglycan-binding SPOR domain. MldB and MldC are predicted to 
be cytoplasmic proteins; MldB has two predicted coiled-coil domains, but MldC 
lacks obvious conserved domains or sequence motifs. Mutants of mldA or mldB had 
morphological defects, including loss of rod shape (a curved cell phenotype) and 
inefficient separation of daughter cells (a chaining phenotype). Fusions of cyan 
fluorescent protein (CFP) to MldA, MldB, and MldC revealed that all three 
proteins localize sharply to the division site. This application of CFP was 
possible because we discovered that O2-dependent fluorescent proteins produced 
anaerobically can acquire fluorescence after cells are fixed with cross-linkers 
to preserve native patterns of protein localization. Mutants lacking the Mld 
proteins are severely attenuated for pathogenesis in a hamster model of C. 
difficile infection. Because all three Mld proteins are essentially unique to C. 
difficile, they might be exploited as targets for antibiotics that combat C. 
difficile without disrupting the intestinal microbiome.
