The toxicity of Clostridium difficile large clostridial toxin B (TcdB) can be 
reduced by many orders of magnitude by a combination of targeted point 
mutations. However, a TcdB mutant with five point mutations (referred to herein 
as mTcdB) still has residual toxicity that can be detected in cell-based assays 
and in-vivo mouse toxicity assays. This residual toxicity can be effectively 
removed by treatment with formaldehyde in solution. Storage of the 
formaldehyde-treated mTcdB as a liquid can result in reversion over time back to 
the mTcdB level of toxicity, with the rate of reversion dependent on the storage 
temperature. We found that for both the "forward" mTcdB detoxification reaction 
with formaldehyde, and the "reverse" reversion to toxicity reaction, mouse 
toxicity correlated with several biochemical assays including anion exchange 
chromatography retention time and appearance on SDS-PAGE. Maintenance of a low 
concentration of formaldehyde prevents reversion to toxicity in liquid 
formulations. However, when samples with 0.016% (v/v) formaldehyde were 
lyophilized and stored at 37 °C, formaldehyde continued to react with and modify 
the mTcdB in the lyophilized state. Lyophilization alone effectively prevented 
reversion to toxicity for formaldehyde-treated, formaldehyde-removed mTcdB 
samples stored at 37 °C for 6 months. Formaldehyde-treated, formaldehyde-removed 
lyophilized mTcdB showed no evidence of reversion to toxicity, appeared stable 
by several assays, and was immunogenic in mice, even after storage for 6 months 
at 37 °C.
