The anaerobic gastrointestinal pathogen Clostridium difficile must form a 
metabolically dormant spore to survive in oxygenic environments and be 
transmitted from host to host. The regulatory factors by which C. difficile 
initiates and controls the early stages of sporulation in C. difficile are not 
highly conserved in other Clostridium or Bacillus species. Here, we investigated 
the role of two conserved oligopeptide permeases, Opp and App, in the regulation 
of sporulation in C. difficile. These permeases are known to positively affect 
sporulation in Bacillus species through the import of sporulation-specific 
quorum-sensing peptides. In contrast to other spore-forming bacteria, we 
discovered that inactivating these permeases in C. difficile resulted in the 
earlier expression of early sporulation genes and increased sporulation in 
vitro. Furthermore, disruption of opp and app resulted in greater virulence and 
increased the amounts of spores recovered from feces in the hamster model of C. 
difficile infection. Our data suggest that Opp and App indirectly inhibit 
sporulation, likely through the activities of the transcriptional regulator SinR 
and its inhibitor, SinI. Taken together, these results indicate that the Opp and 
App transporters serve a different function in controlling sporulation and 
virulence in C. difficile than in Bacillus subtilis and suggest that nutrient 
availability plays a significant role in pathogenesis and sporulation in vivo. 
This study suggests a link between the nutritional status of the environment and 
sporulation initiation in C. difficile.
