The glycylcycline antibiotic tigecycline was approved in 2005 for the treatment 
of complicated skin and soft tissue infections and complicated intra-abdominal 
infections. Tigecycline is broadly active against both Gram-negative and 
Gram-positive microorganisms, including Clostridium difficile. Tigecycline has a 
low MIC against C. difficile in vitro and thus may represent an alternate 
treatment for C. difficile infection (CDI). To assess the use of tigecycline for 
treatment of established CDI, 5- to 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice were colonized with 
C. difficile strain 630. After C. difficile colonization was established, mice 
(n = 10 per group) were treated with either a 5-day course of tigecycline (6.25 
mg/kg every 12 h subcutaneously) or a 5-day course of vancomycin (0.4 mg/ml in 
drinking water) and compared to infected, untreated control mice. Mice were 
evaluated for clinical signs of CDI throughout treatment and at 1 week 
posttreatment to assess potential for disease development. Immediately following 
a treatment course, C. difficile was not detectable in the feces of 
vancomycin-treated mice but remained detectable in feces from 
tigecycline-treated and untreated control mice. Toxin activity and 
histopathological inflammation and edema were observed in the ceca and colons of 
untreated mice; tigecycline- and vancomycin-treated mice did not show such 
changes directly after treatment. One week after the conclusion of either 
antibiotic treatment, C. difficile load, toxin activity, and histopathology 
scores increased in the cecum and colon, indicating that C. difficile-associated 
disease occurred. In vitro growth studies confirmed that subinhibitory 
concentrations of tigecycline were able to suppress toxin activity and spore 
formation of C. difficile, whereas vancomycin did not. Taken together, these 
data show how tigecycline is able to alter C. difficile pathogenesis in a mouse 
model of CDI.
