The prevalence of Clostridium difficile infections has increased due to the 
emergence of epidemic variants from diverse genetic lineages. Here we describe 
the emergence of a novel variant during an outbreak in a Costa Rican hospital 
that was associated with severe clinical presentations. This C. difficile 
variant elicited higher white blood cell counts and caused disease in younger 
patients than did other strains isolated during the outbreak. Furthermore, it 
had a recurrence rate, a 30-day attributable disease rate, and disease severity 
as great as those of the epidemic strain NAP1. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis 
genotyping indicated that the outbreak strains belong to a previously 
undescribed variant, designated NAPCR1. Whole-genome sequencing and ribotyping 
indicated that the NAPCR1 variant belongs to C. difficile ribotype 012 and 
sequence type 54, as does the reference strain 630. NAPCR1 strains are resistant 
to fluoroquinolones due to a mutation in gyrA, and they possess an 18-bp 
deletion in tcdC that is characteristic of the epidemic, evolutionarily 
distinct, C. difficile NAP1 variant. NAPCR1 genomes contain 10% more predicted 
genes than strain 630, most of which are of hypothetical function and are 
present on phages and other mobile genetic elements. The increased virulence of 
NAPCR1 was confirmed by mortality rates in the hamster model and strong 
inflammatory responses induced by bacteria-free supernatants in the murine 
ligated loop model. However, NAPCR1 strains do not synthesize toxin A and toxin 
B at levels comparable to those in NAP1 strains. Our results suggest that the 
pathogenic potential of this emerging C. difficile variant is due to the 
acquisition of hypothetical functions associated with laterally acquired DNA.
