OBJECTIVES: SMT19969 is a novel narrow-spectrum antimicrobial under development 
for the treatment of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). The objectives were 
to assess the relative efficacies of SMT19969, vancomycin and fidaxomicin in the 
hamster model of CDI.
METHODS: Hamsters were infected with either C. difficile BI1 (ribotype 027) or 
C. difficile 630 (ribotype 012) prior to treatment with vehicle, SMT19969, 
fidaxomicin or vancomycin for 5 days. Animals were further monitored through to 
day 28 and survival recorded. Plasma and gastrointestinal concentrations of 
SMT19969 following single and repeat administration in infected hamsters were 
determined.
RESULTS: Following infection with C. difficile BI1, treatment with SMT19969, 
vancomycin and fidaxomicin resulted in 100% survival during the 5 day dosing 
period, with 90%-100% of animals receiving SMT19969 and fidaxomicin surviving 
during the post-dosing follow-up period. Whilst protective during treatment, 
onset of mortality was observed on day 11 in animals treated with vancomycin, 
with a 10% survival recorded by day 28. Similar results were observed for 
SMT19969 and vancomycin following infection with C. difficile 630, with day 28 
survival rates of 80%-100% and 0%, respectively. Fidaxomicin protected animals 
infected with C. difficile 630 from mortality during dosing, although day 28 
survival rates varied from 0% to 40% depending on dose. Plasma levels of 
SMT19969 were typically below the limit of quantification, but levels in the 
gastrointestinal tract remained far in excess of the MIC.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that SMT19969 is highly effective at treating both 
acute infection and preventing recurrent disease and support continued 
investigation of SMT19969 as a potential therapy for CDI.

Â© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy.
