Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the principal cause of nosocomial 
diarrhea and pseudomembranous colitis associated with antibiotic therapy. Recent 
increases in the number of outbreaks attributed to highly virulent 
antibiotic-resistant strains underscore the importance of identifying 
efficacious alternatives to antibiotics to control this infection. CDI is 
mediated by two large exotoxins, toxins A and B. Strong humoral toxin-specific 
immune responses are associated with recovery and a lack of disease recurrence, 
whereas insufficient humoral responses are associated with recurrent CDI. 
Multiple approaches targeting these toxins, including intravenous 
immunoglobulin, neutralizing polymers, active vaccines, and, most recently, 
monoclonal antibodies (MAbs), have been explored, with various degrees of 
success. In this study, we describe the characterization of the first MAbs 
isolated from healthy human donors using a high-throughput B-cell cloning 
strategy. The MAbs were selected based on their ability to inhibit the actions 
of toxins A and B in vitro and because of their in vivo efficacy in a hamster 
challenge model. A potent 2-MAb cocktail was identified and then further 
potentiated by the addition of a second anti-toxin B MAb. This 3-MAb combination 
protected animals against mortality and also reduced the severity and duration 
of diarrhea associated with challenge with highly virulent strains of C. 
difficile toxinotypes 0 and III. This highly efficacious cocktail consists of 
one MAb specific to the receptor binding domain of toxin A and two MAbs specific 
to nonoverlapping regions of the glucosyltransferase domain of toxin B. This MAb 
combination offers great potential as a nonantibiotic treatment for the 
prevention of recurrent CDI.
