The adverse impact of antibiotics on the gut microbiota has attracted extensive 
interest, particularly due to the development of microbiome research techniques 
in recent years. However, a direct comparison of the dynamic effects of various 
types of antibiotics using the same animal model has not been available. In the 
present study, we selected six antibiotics from four categories with the 
broadest clinical usage, namely, β-lactams (Ceftriaxone Sodium, 
Cefoperazone/Sulbactam and meropenem), quinolones (ofloxacin), glycopeptides 
(vancomycin), and macrolides (azithromycin), to treat BALB/c mice. Stool samples 
were collected during and after the administration of antibiotics, and microbial 
diversity was analyzed through Illumina sequencing and bioinformatics analyses 
using QIIME. Both α and β diversity analyses showed that ceftriaxone sodium, 
cefoperazone/sulbactam, meropenem and vancomycin changed the gut microbiota 
dramatically by the second day of antibiotic administration whereas the 
influence of ofloxacin was trivial. Azithromycin clearly changed the gut 
microbiota but much less than vancomycin and the β-lactams. In general, the 
community changes induced by the three β-lactam antibiotics showed consistency 
in inhibiting Papillibacter, Prevotella and Alistipes while inducing massive 
growth of Clostridium. The low diversity and high Clostridium level might be an 
important cause of Clostridium difficile infection after usage of β-lactams. 
Vancomycin was unique in that it inhibited Firmicutes, mainly the genus 
Clostridium. On the other hand, it induced the growth of Escherichia and effect 
lasted for months afterward. Azithromycin and meropenem induced the growth of 
Enterococcus. These findings will be useful for understanding the potential 
adverse effects of antibiotics on the gut microbiome and ensuring their better 
usage.
