Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major cause of health care-associated 
disease. CDI initiates with ingestion of C. difficile spores, germination in the 
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, and then colonization of the large intestine. The 
interactions between C. difficile cells and other bacteria and with host mucosa 
during CDI remain poorly understood. Here, we addressed the hypothesis that, in 
a mouse model of CDI, C. difficile resides in multicellular communities 
(biofilms) in association with host mucosa. To do this, we paraffin embedded and 
then sectioned the GI tracts of infected mice at various days postinfection 
(p.i.). We then used fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with 16S rRNA 
probes targeting most bacteria as well as C. difficile specifically. The results 
revealed that C. difficile is present as a minority member of communities in the 
outer (loose) mucus layer, in the cecum and colon, starting at day 1 p.i. To 
generate FISH probes that identify bacteria within mucus-associated communities 
harboring C. difficile, we characterized bacterial populations in the infected 
mouse GI tract using 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis of bacterial DNA prepared 
from intestinal content. This analysis revealed the presence of genera of 
several families belonging to Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes. These data suggest 
that formation of multispecies communities associated with the mucus of the 
cecum and colon is an important early step in GI tract colonization. They raise 
the possibility that other bacterial species in these communities modulate the 
ability of C. difficile to successfully colonize and, thereby, cause disease.
