Clostridium difficile is the primary cause of nosocomial antibiotic-associated 
diarrhea in the Western world. The major virulence factors of C. difficile are 
two exotoxins, toxin A (TcdA) and toxin B (TcdB), which cause extensive colonic 
inflammation and epithelial damage manifested by episodes of diarrhea. In this 
study, we explored the basis for an oral antitoxin strategy based on engineered 
Lactobacillus strains expressing TcdB-neutralizing antibody fragments in the 
gastrointestinal tract. Variable domain of heavy chain-only (VHH) antibodies 
were raised in llamas by immunization with the complete TcdB toxin. Four unique 
VHH fragments neutralizing TcdB in vitro were isolated. When these VHH fragments 
were expressed in either secreted or cell wall-anchored form in Lactobacillus 
paracasei BL23, they were able to neutralize the cytotoxic effect of the toxin 
in an in vitro cell-based assay. Prophylactic treatment with a combination of 
two strains of engineered L. paracasei BL23 expressing two neutralizing 
anti-TcdB VHH fragments (VHH-B2 and VHH-G3) delayed killing in a hamster 
protection model where the animals were challenged with spores of a TcdA(-) 
TcdB(+) strain of C. difficile (P < 0.05). Half of the hamsters in the treated 
group survived until the termination of the experiment at day 5 and showed 
either no damage or limited inflammation of the colonic mucosa despite having 
been colonized with C. difficile for up to 4 days. The protective effect in the 
hamster model suggests that the strategy could be explored as a supplement to 
existing therapies for patients.
