The microbiome dysbiosis caused by antibiotic treatment has been associated with 
both susceptibility to and relapse of Clostridium difficile infection (CDI). 
Bacteriophage (phage) therapy offers target specificity and dose amplification 
in situ, but few studies have focused on its use in CDI treatment. This mainly 
reflects the lack of strictly virulent phages that target this pathogen. While 
it is widely accepted that temperate phages are unsuitable for therapeutic 
purposes due to their transduction potential, analysis of seven C. difficile 
phages confirmed that this impact could be curtailed by the application of 
multiple phage types. Here, host range analysis of six myoviruses and one 
siphovirus was conducted on 80 strains representing 21 major epidemic and 
clinically severe ribotypes. The phages had complementary coverage, lysing 18 
and 62 of the ribotypes and strains tested, respectively. Single-phage 
treatments of ribotype 076, 014/020, and 027 strains showed an initial reduction 
in the bacterial load followed by the emergence of phage-resistant colonies. 
However, these colonies remained susceptible to infection with an unrelated 
phage. In contrast, specific phage combinations caused the complete lysis of C. 
difficile in vitro and prevented the appearance of resistant/lysogenic clones. 
Using a hamster model, the oral delivery of optimized phage combinations 
resulted in reduced C. difficile colonization at 36 h postinfection. 
Interestingly, free phages were recovered from the bowel at this time. In a 
challenge model of the disease, phage treatment delayed the onset of symptoms by 
33 h compared to the time of onset of symptoms in untreated animals. These data 
demonstrate the therapeutic potential of phage combinations to treat CDI.
