C. difficile infection (CDI) is a common debilitating nosocomial infection 
associated with high mortality. Several CDI outbreaks have been attributed to 
ribotypes 027, 017, and 078. Clinical and experimental evidence indicates that 
the nonpathogenic yeast Saccharomyces boulardii CNCM I-745 (S.b) is effective 
for the prevention of CDI. However, there is no current evidence suggesting this 
probiotic can protect from CDI caused by outbreak-associated strains. We used 
established hamster models infected with outbreak-associated C. difficile 
strains to determine whether oral administration of live or heat-inactivated S.b 
can prevent cecal tissue damage and inflammation. Hamsters infected with C. 
difficile strain VPI10463 (ribotype 087) and outbreak-associated strains 
ribotype 017, 027, and 078 developed severe cecal inflammation with mucosal 
damage, neutrophil infiltration, edema, increased NF-κB phosphorylation, and 
increased proinflammatory cytokine TNFα protein expression. Oral gavage of live, 
but not heated, S.b starting 5 days before C. difficile infection significantly 
reduced cecal tissue damage, NF-κB phosphorylation, and TNFα protein expression 
caused by infection with all strains. Moreover, S.b-conditioned medium reduced 
cell rounding caused by filtered supernatants from all C. difficile strains. 
S.b-conditioned medium also inhibited toxin A- and B-mediated actin cytoskeleton 
disruption. S.b is effective in preventing C. difficile infection by 
outbreak-associated via inhibition of the cytotoxic effects of C. difficile 
toxins.
