The formation of spores is critical for the survival of Clostridium difficile 
outside the host gastrointestinal tract. Persistence of C. difficile spores 
greatly contributes to the spread of C. difficile infection (CDI), and the 
resistance of spores to antimicrobials facilitates the relapse of infection. 
Despite the importance of sporulation to C. difficile pathogenesis, the 
molecular mechanisms controlling spore formation are not well understood. The 
initiation of sporulation is known to be regulated through activation of the 
conserved transcription factor Spo0A. Multiple regulators influence Spo0A 
activation in other species; however, many of these factors are not conserved in 
C. difficile and few novel factors have been identified. Here, we investigated 
the function of a protein, CD1492, that is annotated as a kinase and was 
originally proposed to promote sporulation by directly phosphorylating Spo0A. We 
found that deletion of CD1492 resulted in increased sporulation, indicating that 
CD1492 is a negative regulator of sporulation. Accordingly, we observed 
increased transcription of Spo0A-dependent genes in the CD1492 mutant. Deletion 
of CD1492 also resulted in decreased toxin production in vitro and in decreased 
virulence in the hamster model of CDI. Further, the CD1492 mutant demonstrated 
effects on gene expression that are not associated with Spo0A activation, 
including lower sigD and rstA transcription, suggesting that this protein 
interacts with factors other than Spo0A. Altogether, the data indicate that 
CD1492 negatively affects sporulation and positively influences motility and 
virulence. These results provide further evidence that C. difficile sporulation 
is regulated differently from that of other endospore-forming species.
