Clostridium difficile is a major cause of antibiotic induced diarrhea worldwide, 
responsible for significant annual mortalities and represents a considerable 
economic burden on healthcare systems. The two main C. difficile virulence 
factors are toxins A and B. Isogenic toxin B mutants of 2 independently isolated 
erythromycin-sensitive derivatives (630E and 630Δerm) of strain 630 were 
previously shown to exhibit substantively different phenotypes. Compared to 630, 
strain 630E and its progeny grow slower, achieve lower final cell densities, 
exhibit a reduced capacity for spore-formation, produce lower levels of toxin 
and are less virulent in the hamster infection model. By the same measures, 
strain 630Δerm and its derivatives more closely mirror the behavior of 630. 
Genome sequencing revealed that 630Δerm had acquired 7 unique Single Nucleotide 
Polymorphisms (SNPs) compared to 630 and 630E, while 630E had 9 SNPs and a DNA 
inversion not found in the other 2 strains. The relatively large number of 
mutations meant that the identification of those responsible for the altered 
properties of 630E was not possible, despite the restoration of 3 mutations to 
wildtype by allelic exchange and comparative RNAseq analysis of all 3 strains. 
The latter analysis revealed large differences in gene expression between the 3 
strains, explaining in part why no single SNP could restore the phenotypic 
differences. Our findings suggest that strain 630Δerm should be favored over 
630E as a surrogate for 630 in genetic-based studies. They also underline the 
importance of effective strain curation and the need to genome re-sequence 
master seed banks wherever possible.
