Clostridium difficile causes antibiotic-associated diarrhea in both humans and 
animals. The ribotype 078, predominant in food animals, is associated with 
community-acquired C. difficile infection, and C. difficile is suggested to be a 
foodborne pathogen. Recently, the C. difficile ribotype 078 lineage emerged in 
patients and pigs in Taiwan. This study aimed to investigate the prevalence and 
molecular characterization of C. difficile isolated from a pig slaughterhouse, 
retail meat, ready-to-eat meals, and humans in Taiwan. We collected samples from 
one slaughterhouse (n=422), 29 retail markets (raw pork, n=62; ready-to-eat 
pork, n=65), and one hospital (non-diarrheal humans, stool, n=317) in 2015. The 
isolated C. difficile were subjected to ribotyping and multilocus 
variable-number tandem-repeat analysis (MLVA). In the slaughterhouse, the 
isolation rate from carcasses was high (23%, 21/92) and ribotype 126 dominated. 
Scalding water was found to have C. difficile contamination (44%, 4/9), and two 
of the seven isolates were ribotype 126. The isolation rates from raw pork and 
ready-to-eat pork were between 20% and 29%. Ribotypes 126, 127, and 014 were 
found in raw pork, whereas ribotype 078 was not identified in this study. Eight 
isolates-seven non-toxigenic isolates and one ribotype 017-were found in 
non-diarrheal human samples. Notably, MLVA showed that ribotype 126 isolates 
from the slaughterhouse, pig stool, colons, carcasses, and scalding water were 
closely genetically related, indicating serious risk for cross-contamination. 
However, the genetic evidence of foodborne transmission from carcasses to food 
and humans is still lacking.
