Antibiotics excreted into the intestinal tract may disrupt the microbiota that 
provide colonization resistance against enteric pathogens and alter normal 
metabolic functions of the microbiota. Many of the bacterial metabolites 
produced in the intestinal tract are absorbed systemically and excreted in 
urine. Here, we used a mouse model to test the hypothesis that alterations in 
levels of targeted bacterial metabolites in urine specimens could provide useful 
biomarkers indicating disrupted or intact colonization resistance. To assess in 
vivo colonization resistance, mice were challenged with Clostridium difficile 
spores orally 3, 6, and 11 days after the completion of 2 days of treatment with 
piperacillin-tazobactam, aztreonam, or saline. For concurrent groups of 
antibiotic-treated mice, urine samples were analyzed by using liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) to quantify the 
concentrations of 11 compounds targeted as potential biomarkers of colonization 
resistance. Aztreonam did not affect colonization resistance, whereas 
piperacillin-tazobactam disrupted colonization resistance 3 days after 
piperacillin-tazobactam treatment, with complete recovery by 11 days after 
treatment. Three of the 11 compounds exhibited a statistically significant and 
>10-fold increase (the tryptophan metabolite N-acetyltryptophan) or decrease 
(the plant polyphenyl derivatives cinnamoylglycine and enterodiol) in 
concentrations in urine 3 days after piperacillin-tazobactam treatment, followed 
by recovery to baseline that coincided with the restoration of in vivo 
colonization resistance. These urinary metabolites could provide useful and 
easily accessible biomarkers indicating intact or disrupted colonization 
resistance during and after antibiotic treatment.
