The current treatment paradigm in Clostridium difficile infection is the 
administration of antibiotics contributing to the high rates of recurrent 
infections. Recent alternative strategies, such as fecal microbiome 
transplantation and anti-toxin antibodies, have shown similar efficacy in the 
treatment of C. difficile associated disease (CDAD). However, barriers exist for 
either treatment or other novel treatments to displace antibiotics as the 
standard of care. To aid in the comparison of these and future treatments in 
CDAD, we developed an in silico pipeline to predict clinical efficacy with 
nonclinical results. The pipeline combines an ordinary differential equation 
(ODE)-based model, describing the immunological and microbial interactions in 
the gastrointestinal (GI) mucosa, with machine learning algorithms to translate 
simulated output quantities (i.e. time of clearance, quantity of commensal 
bacteria, T cell ratios) into clinical predictions based on prior preclinical, 
translational and clinical trial data. As a use case, we compare the efficacy of 
lanthionine synthetase C-like 2 (LANCL2), a novel immunoregulatory target with 
promising efficacy in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), activation with 
antibiotics, fecal microbiome transplantation and anti-toxin antibodies in the 
treatment of CDAD. We further validate the potential of LANCL2 pathway 
activation, in a mouse model of C. difficile infection in which it displays an 
ability to decrease weight loss and inflammatory cell types while protecting 
against mortality. The computational pipeline can serve as an important resource 
in the development of new treatment modalities.
