BACKGROUND: Peptoclostridium (Clostridium) difficile is a spore-forming 
bacterium responsible for nosocomial infections in humans. It is recognized as 
an important agent of diarrhea and colitis in several animal species and a 
possible zoonotic agent. Despite the known importance of P. difficile infection 
in humans and animals, no vaccine or other effective measure to control the 
disease is commercially available. A possible alternative treatment for P. 
difficile infection is the use of a nontoxigenic strain of P. difficile as a 
competitive exclusion agent. However, a thorough knowledge of this strain is 
necessary for this purpose. We selected P. difficile Z31, a nontoxigenic strain 
(PCR ribotype 009), for investigation because it prevents P. difficile infection 
in a hamster model.
RESULTS: The genome sequence of P. difficile Z31 is a circular chromosome of 
4298,263 bp, with a 29.21 % GC content, encoding 4128 proteins, and containing 
78 pseudogenes. This strain belongs to ST 3, clade 1, and has five phage regions 
in its genome. Genes responsible for resistance to tetracycline and erythromycin 
were detected and more importantly, Z31 also contains genes that promote spore 
production and stability, cell attachment, intestinal adherence, and biofilm 
formation.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we present the first complete genome sequence of 
nontoxigenic P. difficile strain Z31. When the Z31 genome was compared with 
those of other isolates available in GenBank, including a draft genome of a 
nontoxigenic strain, several unique regions were evident. Z31 contains no toxin 
genes, but encodes several non-toxin virulence factors, which may favor host 
colonization.
