There is a medical need for antibacterial agents that do not damage the resident 
gut microbiota or promote the spread of antibiotic resistance. We recently 
described a prototypic precision bactericidal agent, Av-CD291.2, which 
selectively kills specific Clostridium difficile strains and prevents them from 
colonizing mice. We have since selected two Av-CD291.2-resistant mutants that 
have a surface (S)-layer-null phenotype due to distinct point mutations in the 
slpA gene. Using newly identified bacteriophage receptor binding proteins for 
targeting, we constructed a panel of Avidocin-CDs that kills diverse C. 
difficile isolates in an S-layer sequence-dependent manner. In addition to 
bacteriophage receptor recognition, characterization of the mutants also 
uncovered important roles for S-layer protein A (SlpA) in sporulation, 
resistance to innate immunity effectors, and toxin production. Surprisingly, 
S-layer-null mutants were found to persist in the hamster gut despite a complete 
attenuation of virulence. These findings suggest antimicrobials targeting 
virulence factors dispensable for fitness in the host force pathogens to trade 
virulence for viability and would have clear clinical advantages should 
resistance emerge. Given their exquisite specificity for the pathogen, 
Avidocin-CDs have substantial therapeutic potential for the treatment and 
prevention of C. difficile infections.

Copyright Â© 2017 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.
