Most pathogenic Clostridium difficile produce two major exotoxins TcdA and TcdB, 
in the absence of which the bacterium is non-pathogenic. While it is important 
to investigate the role of each toxin in the pathogenesis of C. difficile 
infection (CDI) using isogenic strains, it is impossible to precisely control 
the expression levels of individual toxins and exclude bacterial factors that 
may contribute to the toxins' effects during infection. In this study, we 
utilized an acute intestinal disease model by injecting purified toxins directly 
into mouse cecum after a midline laparotomy. We evaluated the physical condition 
of mice by clinical score and survival, and the intestinal tissue damage and 
inflammation by histology. Depending on the dose of the toxins, mice developed 
mild to severe colitis, experienced diarrhea or rapidly died. We found that both 
purified TcdA and TcdB were able to induce clinical disease, intestinal 
inflammation, and tissue damage that resembled CDI. TcdA was significantly 
faster in inducing intestinal inflammation and tissue damage, and was 
approximately five times more potent than TcdB in terms of inducing severe gut 
disease and death outcomes in mice. Moreover, we found that the two toxins had 
significant synergistic effects on disease induction. Comparison of the in vivo 
toxicity of TcdB from clinical strains revealed that TcdB from an epidemic RT 
027 strain was more toxic than the others. Our study thus demonstrates that both 
TcdA and TcdB, independent of other factors from C. difficile bacterium, are 
able to cause disease that resembles CDI and highlights the importance of 
targeting both toxins for vaccines and therapeutics against the disease.
