Clostridium difficile causes diarrhea and colitis by releasing toxin A and toxin 
B. In the human colon, both toxins cause intestinal inflammation and stimulate 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) expression via the activation of NF-κB. It 
is well established that the macrolide antibiotic fidaxomicin is associated with 
reduced relapses of C. difficile infection. We showed that fidaxomicin and its 
primary metabolite OP-1118 significantly inhibited toxin A-mediated intestinal 
inflammation in mice in vivo and toxin A-induced cell rounding in vitro We aim 
to determine whether fidaxomicin and OP-1118 possess anti-inflammatory effects 
against toxin A and toxin B in the human colon and examine the mechanism of this 
response. We used fresh human colonic explants, NCM460 human colonic epithelial 
cells, and RAW264.7 mouse macrophages to study the mechanism of the activity of 
fidaxomicin and OP-1118 against toxin A- and B-mediated cytokine expression and 
apoptosis. Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 dose-dependently inhibited toxin A- and 
B-induced TNF-α and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) mRNA expression and histological 
damage in human colonic explants. Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 inhibited toxin 
A-mediated NF-κB phosphorylation in human and mouse intestinal mucosae. 
Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 also inhibited toxin A-mediated NF-κB phosphorylation 
and TNF-α expression in macrophages, which was reversed by the NF-κB activator 
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA). Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 prevented toxin A- and 
B-mediated apoptosis in NCM460 cells, which was reversed by the addition of PMA. 
PMA reversed the cytoprotective effect of fidaxomicin and OP-1118 in 
toxin-exposed human colonic explants. Fidaxomicin and OP-1118 inhibit C. 
difficile toxin A- and B-mediated inflammatory responses, NF-κB phosphorylation, 
and tissue damage in the human colon.
