BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) in humans range from 
asymptomatic carriage to life-threatening intestinal disease. Findings on C. 
difficile in various animal species and an overlap in ribotypes (RTs) suggest 
potential zoonotic transmission. However, the impact of animals for human CDI 
remains unclear.
METHODS: In a large-scale survey we collected 1,447 fecal samples to determine 
the occurrence of C. difficile in small companion animals (dogs and cats) and 
their owners and to assess potential epidemiological links within the community. 
The Germany-wide survey was conducted from July 2012-August 2013. PCR 
ribotyping, Multilocus VNTR Analysis (MLVA) and PCR detection of toxin genes 
were used to characterize isolated C. difficile strains. A database was defined 
and logistic regression used to identify putative factors associated with fecal 
shedding of C. difficile.
RESULTS: In total, 1,418 samples met the inclusion criteria. The isolation rates 
for small companion animals and their owners within the community were similarly 
low with 3.0% (25/840) and 2.9% (17/578), respectively. PCR ribotyping revealed 
eight and twelve different RTs in animals and humans, respectively, whereas 
three RTs were isolated in both, humans and animals. RT 014/0, a well-known 
human hospital-associated lineage, was predominantly detected in animal samples. 
Moreover, the potentially highly pathogenic RTs 027 and 078 were isolated from 
dogs. Even though, C. difficile did not occur simultaneously in animals and 
humans sharing the same household. The results of the epidemiological analysis 
of factors associated with fecal shedding of C. difficile support the hypothesis 
of a zoonotic potential.
CONCLUSIONS: Molecular characterization and epidemiological analysis revealed 
that the zoonotic risk for C. difficile associated with dogs and cats within the 
community is low but cannot be excluded.
