Vancomycin taper regimens are commonly used for the treatment of recurrent 
Clostridium difficile infections. One rationale for tapering and pulsing of the 
dose at the end of therapy is to reduce the selective pressure of vancomycin on 
the indigenous intestinal microbiota. Here, we used a mouse model to test the 
hypothesis that the indigenous microbiota that provide colonization resistance 
against C. difficile and vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE) is repopulated 
during tapering courses of vancomycin. Mice were treated orally with vancomycin 
daily for 10 days, vancomycin in a tapering dose for 42 days, fidaxomicin for 10 
days, or saline. To assess colonization resistance, subsets of mice were 
challenged with 104 CFU of C. difficile or VRE at multiple time points during 
and after completion of treatment. The impact of the treatments on the 
microbiome was measured by cultures, real-time PCR for selected anaerobic 
bacteria, and deep sequencing. Vancomycin taper-treated mice developed 
alterations of the microbiota and disruption of colonization resistance that was 
persistent 18 days after treatment. In contrast, mice treated with a 10-day 
course of vancomycin exhibited recovery of the microbiota and of colonization 
resistance by 15 days after treatment, and fidaxomicin-treated mice maintained 
intact colonization resistance. These findings demonstrate that alteration of 
the indigenous microbiota responsible for colonization resistance to C. 
difficile and VRE persist during and after completion of tapering courses of 
vancomycin.
