Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is the primary cause of nosocomial 
diarrhea in the United States. Although C. difficile toxins A and B are the 
primary mediators of CDI, the overall pathophysiology underlying C. 
difficile-associated diarrhea remains poorly understood. Studies have shown that 
a decrease in both NHE3 (Na+/H+ exchanger) and DRA (downregulated in adenoma, 
Cl-/[Formula: see text] exchanger), resulting in decreased electrolyte 
absorption, is implicated in infectious and inflammatory diarrhea. Furthermore, 
studies have shown that NHE3 is depleted at the apical surface of intestinal 
epithelial cells and downregulated in patients with CDI, but the role of DRA in 
CDI remains unknown. In the current studies, we examined the effects of C. 
difficile toxins TcdA and TcdB on DRA protein and mRNA levels in intestinal 
epithelial cells (IECs). Our data demonstrated that DRA protein levels were 
significantly reduced in response to TcdA and TcdB in IECs in culture. This 
effect was also specific to DRA, as NHE3 and PAT-1 (putative anion transporter 
1) protein levels were unaffected by TcdA and TcdB. Additionally, purified TcdA 
and TcdA + TcdB, but not TcdB, resulted in a decrease in colonic DRA protein 
levels in a toxigenic mouse model of CDI. Finally, patients with recurrent CDI 
also exhibited significantly reduced expression of colonic DRA protein. 
Together, these findings indicate that C. difficile toxins markedly downregulate 
intestinal expression of DRA which may contribute to the diarrheal phenotype of 
CDI. NEW & NOTEWORTHY Our studies demonstrate, for the first time, that C. 
difficile toxins reduce DRA protein, but not mRNA, levels in intestinal 
epithelial cells. These findings suggest that a downregulation of DRA may be a 
critical factor in C. difficile infection-associated diarrhea.
