Tumor progression locus 2 (TPL2), a serine/threonine protein kinase, is a major 
inflammatory mediator in immune cells. The predominant inflammatory actions of 
TPL2 depend on the activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) and 
the upregulated production of the cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) 
and interleukin 1β (IL-1β) in macrophages and dendritic cells in response to 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Significant increases in TNF-α, IL-6, IL-β, and IL-8 
levels in patients with Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) have been 
reported. Both TNF-α and IL-6 have been postulated to play key roles in the 
systemic inflammatory response in CDI, and IL-8 is essential for the development 
of local intestinal inflammatory responses in CDI. The objective of this study 
was to elucidate the role of TPL2 in the pathogenesis of CDI. We found that TPL2 
was significantly activated in human and mouse intestinal tissues upon C. 
difficile toxin exposure or CDI. We further demonstrated that TPL2 knockout 
(TPL2-KO) mice were significantly more resistant to CDI than wild-type mice, 
with significantly reduced production of TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, KC (a mouse 
homologue of IL-8), and myeloperoxidase (MPO) in the ceca and colons of TPL2-KO 
mice. Finally, we found that TPL2 inhibition by a specific inhibitor or TPL2 
gene ablation significantly reduced TcdB-induced production of TNF-α, IL-6, 
IL-β, and KC by inhibiting the activation of p38, extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase (ERK), and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK). Taken together, our data 
suggest that TPL2 represents a potential therapeutic target for CDI treatment.
