Clostridium difficile is a major nosocomial pathogen in humans with an 
increasing incidence in the community. The "one-health" approach of research is 
needed to investigate possible reservoirs of C. difficile and route of its 
transmission. The objective of this study is to investigate the occurrence of C. 
difficile in pigs in the Czech Republic with characterisation of the isolates to 
determine their genetic relatedness to C. difficile isolates from European and 
Asian pigs. A total of 198 pig faeces samples from 23 farms were investigated 
and of those 57 samples (55 piglets, 2 sows) from 11 farms were confirmed as C. 
difficile positive. The majority of C. difficile isolates belonged to the 
sequence type 11 and clade 5. The predominant ribotypes were 078 (n = 23), 
078-variant (n = 5), 033 (n = 10) followed by RTs 150 (n = 7), 011 (n = 5), 045 
(n = 4), 126, 014, 002 (n = 1, each). All isolates were susceptible to 
metronidazole, vancomycin and tetracycline. Isolates of RTs 150 and 078-variant 
were moxifloxacin resistant (MIC≥32 mg/L) and carried the amino acid 
substitution Thr82Ile in the GyrA. A multi-locus variable number tandem-repeats 
analysis (MLVA) revealed a clonal relatedness of isolates within individual 
farms and in C. difficile RT078 isolates between two Czech farms. Czech C. 
difficile RT078 isolates clustered with German C. difficile RT078 isolates and 
Czech C. difficile 078-variant isolates clustered with C. difficile RT078 
isolates from Japan and Taiwan. This study found an emergence of C. difficile 
RT078 in Czech piglets that was related genetically to C. difficile RT078 
isolates from Germany, Japan and Taiwan.
