Clostridium difficile is well known as an agent responsible for pseudomembranous 
colitis and antibiotic-associated diarrhea. The hamster model utilizing an oral 
route for infection of C. difficile has been considered to be the standard model 
for analysis of C. difficile infection (CDI) but this model exhibits differences 
to human CDI, most notably as most hamsters die without exhibiting diarrhea. 
Therefore, we attempted to develop a new non-lethal and diarrheal rat CDI model 
caused by endogenous C. difficile using metronidazole (MNZ) and egg white. In 
addition, the effects of probiotic strain Clostridium butyricum MIYAIRI 588 
(CBM) on CDI were examined using this model. Syrian Golden hamsters received 
clindamycin phosphate orally at 30 mg/kg on 5 days before challenge with either 
C. difficile VPI10463 (hypertoxigenic strain) or KY34 (low toxigenic clinical 
isolate). Mortality and the presence of diarrhea were observed twice a day for 
the duration of the experiment. Wistar rats received 10% egg white dissolved in 
drinking water for 1 week ad libitum following intramuscular administration of 
200 mg/kg MNZ twice a day for 3 days. Diarrhea score was determined for each day 
and fecal water content, biotin concentration, and cytotoxin titer in feces were 
examined. More than 70% of hamsters orally infected with C. difficile died 
without exhibiting diarrhea regardless of toxigenicity of strain. The rats 
receiving egg white after MNZ administration developed diarrhea due to 
overgrowth of endogenous C. difficile. This CDI model is non-lethal and 
diarrheal, and some rats in this model were spontaneously cured. The incidence 
of diarrhea was significantly decreased in C. butyricum treated rats. These 
results indicate that the CDI model using egg white and MNZ has potentially 
better similarity to human CDI, and implies that treatment with C. butyricum may 
reduce the risk of CDI.
