OBJECTIVES: Antibiotic-associated diarrhoea (AAD) caused by C. difficile is one 
of the most common nosocomial infections, however, little is known about 
infections related to antimicrobial use for pathogens other than C. difficile. 
We therefore aimed to provide insight into other bacterial causes of AAD, and 
how infection with these pathogens causes damage in the dysbiotic gut.
METHODS: Clinical isolates from C. difficile-negative AAD patients were whole 
genome sequenced for in silico analysis of potential virulence factors and 
antimicrobial resistance determinants. A mouse model of infection was developed 
to assess the capacity of these isolates to cause gastrointestinal damage, which 
was analysed by studying specific markers in the gastrointestinal mucosa of 
infected mice.
RESULTS: Several bacterial pathogens were isolated from patients with C. 
difficile-negative AAD. Each isolate showed the potential for virulence based on 
encoded virulence factors, as well as most showing antimicrobial resistance in 
vitro. Isolates of Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Klebsiella 
pneumoniae were tested in the mouse model of infection, inducing damage 
primarily in the small intestine, affecting adherens junction integrity, 
cellular polarity, and cellular proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Several pathogens of clinical importance other than C. difficile 
are able to cause gastrointestinal infection following antimicrobial-mediated 
dysbiosis. The virulence potential and multidrug resistance identified in these 
isolates illuminates the importance of further diagnostic screening in cases of 
C. difficile-negative AAD.
