Antibiotic disruption of the intestinal microbiota favors colonization by 
Clostridium difficile Using a charcoal-based adsorbent to decrease intestinal 
antibiotic concentrations, we studied the relationship between antibiotic 
concentrations in feces and the intensity of dysbiosis and quantified the link 
between this intensity and mortality. We administered either moxifloxacin (n = 
70) or clindamycin (n = 60) to hamsters by subcutaneous injection from day 1 
(D1) to D5 and challenged them with a C. difficile toxigenic strain at D3 
Hamsters received various doses of a charcoal-based adsorbent, DAV131A, to 
modulate intestinal antibiotic concentrations. Gut dysbiosis was evaluated at D0 
and D3 using diversity indices determined from 16S rRNA gene profiling. Survival 
was monitored until D16 We analyzed the relationship between fecal antibiotic 
concentrations and dysbiosis at the time of C. difficile challenge and studied 
their capacity to predict subsequent death of the animals. Increasing doses of 
DAV131A reduced fecal concentrations of both antibiotics, lowered dysbiosis, and 
increased survival from 0% to 100%. Mortality was related to the level of 
dysbiosis (P < 10-5 for the change of Shannon index in moxifloxacin-treated 
animals and P < 10-9 in clindamycin-treated animals). The Shannon diversity 
index and unweighted UniFrac distance best predicted death, with areas under the 
receiver operating curve (ROC) of 0.89 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.82, 
0.95) and 0.95 (0.90, 0.98), respectively. Altogether, moxifloxacin and 
clindamycin disrupted the diversity of the intestinal microbiota with a 
dependency on the DAV131A dose; mortality after C. difficile challenge was 
related to the intensity of dysbiosis in similar manners with the two 
antibiotics.
