Clostridium difficile is a Gram-positive spore-forming anaerobe and a major 
cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea. Disruption of the commensal 
microbiota, such as through treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics, is a 
critical precursor for colonisation by C. difficile and subsequent disease. 
Furthermore, failure of the gut microbiota to recover colonisation resistance 
can result in recurrence of infection. An unusual characteristic of C. difficile 
among gut bacteria is its ability to produce the bacteriostatic compound 
para-cresol (p-cresol) through fermentation of tyrosine. Here, we demonstrate 
that the ability of C. difficile to produce p-cresol in vitro provides a 
competitive advantage over gut bacteria including Escherichia coli, Klebsiella 
oxytoca and Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. Metabolic profiling of competitive 
co-cultures revealed that acetate, alanine, butyrate, isobutyrate, p-cresol and 
p-hydroxyphenylacetate were the main metabolites responsible for differentiating 
the parent strain C. difficile (630Î”erm) from a defined mutant deficient in 
p-cresol production. Moreover, we show that the p-cresol mutant displays a 
fitness defect in a mouse relapse model of C. difficile infection (CDI). 
Analysis of the microbiome from this mouse model of CDI demonstrates that 
colonisation by the p-cresol mutant results in a distinctly altered intestinal 
microbiota, and metabolic profile, with a greater representation of 
Gammaproteobacteria, including the Pseudomonales and Enterobacteriales. We 
demonstrate that Gammaproteobacteria are susceptible to exogenous p-cresol in 
vitro and that there is a clear divide between bacterial Phyla and their 
susceptibility to p-cresol. In general, Gram-negative species were relatively 
sensitive to p-cresol, whereas Gram-positive species were more tolerant. This 
study demonstrates that production of p-cresol by C. difficile has an effect on 
the viability of intestinal bacteria as well as the major metabolites produced 
in vitro. These observations are upheld in a mouse model of CDI, in which 
p-cresol production affects the biodiversity of gut microbiota and faecal 
metabolite profiles, suggesting that p-cresol production contributes to C. 
difficile survival and pathogenesis.
