Spores are produced by many organisms as a survival mechanism activated in 
response to several environmental stresses. Bacterial spores are multilayered 
structures, one of which is a peptidoglycan layer called the cortex, containing 
muramic-δ-lactams that are synthesized by at least two bacterial enzymes, the 
muramoyl-l-alanine amidase CwlD and the N-deacetylase PdaA. This study focused 
on the spore cortex of Clostridium difficile, a Gram-positive, toxin-producing 
anaerobic bacterial pathogen that can colonize the human intestinal tract and is 
a leading cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. Using ultra-HPLC coupled with 
high-resolution MS, here we found that the spore cortex of the C. difficile 
630Δerm strain differs from that of Bacillus subtilis Among these differences, 
the muramic-δ-lactams represented only 24% in C. difficile, compared with 50% in 
B. subtilis CD630_14300 and CD630_27190 were identified as genes encoding the C. 
difficile N-deacetylases PdaA1 and PdaA2, required for muramic-δ-lactam 
synthesis. In a pdaA1 mutant, only 0.4% of all muropeptides carried a 
muramic-δ-lactam modification, and muramic-δ-lactams were absent in the cortex 
of a pdaA1-pdaA2 double mutant. Of note, the pdaA1 mutant exhibited decreased 
sporulation, altered germination, decreased heat resistance, and delayed 
virulence in a hamster infection model. These results suggest a much greater 
role for muramic-δ-lactams in C. difficile than in other bacteria, including B. 
subtilis In summary, the spore cortex of C. difficile contains lower levels of 
muramic-δ-lactams than that of B. subtilis, and PdaA1 is the major N-deacetylase 
for muramic-δ-lactam biosynthesis in C. difficile, contributing to sporulation, 
heat resistance, and virulence.
