Introduction: Bile acids (BA) influence germination and growth of Clostridium 
difficile. Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a BA minor in human, used for 
cholestatic liver diseases, inhibits germination and growth of C. difficile in 
vitro, but was never tested in vivo with an infectious challenge versus control. 
We hypothesized that UDCA could prevent CDI. We evaluated the effects of UDCA on 
C. difficile in vitro and in hamsters, with pharmacokinetics study and with an 
infectious challenge. Then, we studied CDI incidence in UDCA-treated patients. 
Methods: We evaluated germination and growth of C. difficile, with 0.01, 0.05, 
and 0.1% UDCA. We analyzed fecal BA of hamsters receiving antibiotics and UDCA 
(50 mg/kg/day), antibiotics, or UDCA alone. Then, we challenged with spores of 
C. difficile at D6 hamsters treated with UDCA (50 mg/kg/day) from D1 to D13, 
versus control. In human, we analyzed the database of a cohort on CDI in acute 
flares of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). As PSC-IBD patients were under UDCA 
treatment, we compared PSC-IBD patients to IBD patients without PSC. Results: In 
vitro, UDCA inhibited germination and growth of C. difficile at 0.05 and 0.1%, 
competing with 0.1% TCA (with 0.1%: 0.05% ± 0.05% colony forming unit versus 
100% ± 0%, P < 0.0001). In hamsters, UDCA reached high levels only when 
administered with antibiotics (43.5% UDCA at D5). Without antibiotics, UDCA was 
in small amount in feces (max. 4.28%), probably because of UDCA transformation 
into LCA by gut microbiota. During infectious challenge, mortality was similar 
in animals treated or not with UDCA (62.5%, n = 5/8, P = 0.78). UDCA percentage 
was high, similar and with the same kinetics in dead and surviving hamsters. 
However, dead hamsters had a higher ratio of primary over secondary BA compared 
to surviving hamsters. 9% (n = 41/404) of IBD patients without PSC had a CDI, 
versus 25% (n = 4/12) of PSC-IBD patients treated with UDCA. Conclusion: We 
confirmed the inhibitory effect of UDCA on growth and germination of C. 
difficile in vitro, with 0.05 or 0.1% UDCA. However, in our hamster model, UDCA 
was inefficient to prevent CDI, despite high levels of UDCA in feces. Patients 
with PSC-IBD treated with UDCA did not have less CDI than IBD patients.
