Gut fungi may influence the course of Clostridium difficile infection either 
positively or negatively for the host. Fungi are not prominent in the mouse gut, 
and C. albicans, the major human gastrointestinal commensal yeast, is in low 
abundance or absent in mice. Bifidobacterium is one of the probiotics that may 
attenuate the severity of C. difficile infection. Inflammatory synergy between 
C. albicans and C. difficile, in gut, may provide a state that more closely 
resembles human infection and be more suitable for testing probiotic effects. We 
performed fecal mycobiota analysis and administered C. albicans at 1 day prior 
to C. difficile dosing. Fecal eukaryotic 18S rDNA analysis demonstrated the 
presence of Ascomycota, specifically, Candida spp., after oral antibiotics, 
despite negative fecal fungal culture. C. albicans administration enhanced the 
severity of the C. difficile infection model as determined by mortality rate, 
weight loss, gut leakage (FITC-dextran assay), and serum and intestinal tissue 
cytokines. This occurred without increased fecal C. difficile or bacteremia, in 
comparison with C. difficile gavage alone. Candida lysate with C. difficile 
increased IL-8 production from HT-29 and Caco-2 human intestinal epithelial 
cell-lines. Bifidobacterium attenuated the disease severity of the C. difficile 
plus Candida model. The reduced severity was associated with decreased Candida 
burdens in feces. In conclusion, gut C. albicans worsened C. difficile 
infection, possibly through exacerbation of inflammation. Hence, a mouse model 
of Clostridium difficile infection with C. albicans present in the gut may 
better model the human patient condition. Gut fungal mycobiome investigation in 
patients with C. difficile is warranted and may suggest therapeutic targets.
