Toxin-induced Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is a major disease 
characterized by severe diarrhea and high morbidity rates. The aim with this 
study was to develop an alternative drug for the treatment of CDI. Cows were 
repeatedly immunized to establish specific immunoglobulin G and A titers against 
toxins A (TcdA) and B (TcdB) and against C. difficile cells in mature milk or 
colostrum. The effect of three different concentrations of anti-C. difficile 
whey protein isolates (anti-CD-WPI) and the standard of care antibiotic 
vancomycin were investigated in an animal model of CD infected hamsters (6 
groups, with 10 hamsters each). WPI obtained from the milk of exactly the same 
cows pre-immunization and a vehicle group served as negative controls. The 
survival of hamsters receiving anti-CD-WPI was 50, 80 and 100% compared to 10 
and 0% for the control groups, respectively. Vancomycin suppressed the growth of 
C. difficile and thus protected the hamsters at the time of administration, but 
90% of these hamsters nevertheless died shortly after discontinuation of 
treatment. In contrast, the surviving hamsters of the anti-CD-WPI groups 
survived the entire study period, although they were treated for only 75 h. The 
specific antibodies not only inactivated the toxins for initial suppression of 
CDI, but also provoked the inhibition of C. difficile growth after 
discontinuation, thus preventing recurrence. Oral administration of anti-CD-WPI 
is a functional therapy of CDI in infected hamsters for both primary treatment 
and prevention of recurrence. Thus, anti-CD-WPI could address the urgent unmet 
medical need for treating and preventing recurrent CDI in humans.
