Probiotics may represent a promising approach for reducing Clostridioides 
(Clostridium) difficile infections (CDIs). A clinical trial conducted by our 
group demonstrated that CDI patients undergoing adjunctive treatment with 
Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium probiotics had a reduction in diarrheal 
duration and compositional changes in their stool microbiomes. Here, we modified 
a CDI mouse model to represent clinical outcomes observed in patients and 
employed this model to identify evidence for the prevention of primary CDI and 
relapse with the same probiotic. Mice (n = 80) were administered 0.25 mg/ml 
cefoperazone over 5 days and subsequently challenged with 102 C. difficile VPI 
10463 spores. A subset of mice (n = 40) were administered 108 CFU of probiotics 
daily alongside cefoperazone pretreatment and until experimental endpoints were 
reached. Clinical scoring was performed daily on mice and used to evaluate CDI 
onset and severity. Moderate CDI in mice was defined by survival beyond day 3 
postinfection, while mice with severe CDI were those who succumbed to infection 
prior to day 3 postinfection. Sequencing and analysis of 16S rRNA from stool 
content were performed to determine compositional alterations to the microbiota. 
Using total clinical scores, we identified an association between probiotic 
treatment and delayed onset of primary CDI and relapse by approximately 12 to 
24 h (P < 0.001). The stool microbiome of mice with moderate CDI receiving 
probiotic treatment was significantly enriched with Lachnospiraceae during 
primary CDI (P < 0.05). The outcomes observed present an opportunity to use this 
modified CDI mouse model to examine the efficacy of nonantibiotic options for 
CDI management.
