Clostridium (syn. Clostridioides) difficile is considered a pioneer colonizer 
and may cause gut infection in neonatal piglets. The aim of this study was to 
explore the microbiota-C. difficile associations in pigs. We used the DNA from 
the faeces of four sows collected during the periparturient period and from two 
to three of their piglets (collected weekly until nine weeks of age) for the 
determination of bacterial community composition (sequencing) and C. difficile 
concentration (qPCR). Furthermore, C. difficile-negative faeces were enriched in 
a growth medium, followed by qPCR to verify the presence of this bacterium. 
Clostridium-sensu-stricto-1 and Lactobacillus spp. predominated the gut 
microbiota of the sows and their offspring. C. difficile was detected at least 
once in the faeces of all sows during the entire sampling period, albeit at low 
concentrations. Suckling piglets harboured C. difficile in high concentrations 
(up to log10 9.29 copy number/g faeces), which gradually decreased as the 
piglets aged. Enrichment revealed the presence of C. difficile in previously C. 
difficile-negative sow and offspring faeces. In suckling piglets, the C. 
difficile level was negatively correlated with carbohydrate-fermenting bacteria, 
and it was positively associated with potential pathogens. Shannon and richness 
diversity indices were negatively associated with the C. difficile counts in 
suckling piglets. This study showed that gut microbiota seems to set conditions 
for colonisation resistance against C. difficile in the offspring. However, this 
conclusion requires further research to include host-specific factors.
