The relevance of large clostridial toxin-negative, binary toxin-producing 
(A-B-CDT+) Clostridium difficile strains in human infection is still 
controversial. In this study, we investigated putative virulence traits that may 
contribute to the role of A-B-CDT+C. difficile strains in idiopathic diarrhea. 
Phenotypic assays were conducted on 148 strains of C. difficile comprising 10 
different A-B-CDT+C. difficile ribotypes (RTs): 033, 238, 239, 288, 585, 586, 
QX143, QX444, QX521 and QX629. A subset of these isolates (n = 53) was 
whole-genome sequenced to identify genetic loci associated with virulence and 
survival. Motility studies showed that with the exception of RT 239 all RTs 
tested were non-motile. C. difficile RTs 033 and 288 had deletions in the F2 and 
F3 regions of their flagella operon while the F2 region was absent from strains 
of RTs 238, 585, 586, QX143, QX444, QX521 and QX629. The flagellin and flagella 
cap genes, fliC and fliD, respectively, involved in adherence and host 
colonization, were conserved in all strains, including reference strains. All 
A-B-CDT+C. difficile strains produced at least three extracellular enzymes 
(deoxyribonuclease, esterase and mucinase) indicating that these are important 
extracellular proteins. The toxicity of A-B-CDT+C. difficile strains in Vero 
cells was confirmed, however, pathogenicity was not demonstrated in a mouse 
model of disease. Despite successful colonization by most strains, there was no 
evidence of disease in mice. This study provides the first in-depth analysis of 
A-B-CDT+C. difficile strains and contributes to the current limited knowledge of 
these strains as a cause of C. difficile infection.
