Clostridium difficile infections (CDI) are a major cause of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea. It is hypothesized that CDI develops due to the 
antibiotic-induced disruption of the intestinal microbial community structure, 
which allows C. difficile to flourish. Here, we pre-treated weaned pigs with the 
antibiotics Clindamycin or Ciprofloxacin for 1 day, and subsequently inoculated 
them with a human and pig enteropathogenic C. difficile strain 078 spores. Body 
temperature, clinical signs of disease, and the fecal microbiome were monitored 
daily for 15 days. Clindamycin had a stronger effect on the pigs than 
Ciprofloxacin, resulting in drastic shifts in the fecal microbiome, decreases in 
microbial diversity and significant increases in body temperature, even in the 
absence of C. difficile. Fecal shedding of C. difficile was detectable for 3 and 
9 days in Ciprofloxacin and Clindamycin treated pigs inoculated with C. 
difficile, respectively, and in both cases decreased cell proliferation rates 
were detected in colon tissue. The timing of C. difficile shedding coincided 
with the decrease in a large cluster of Firmicutes following Clindamycin 
treatment, a pattern which was also independent of C. difficile inoculation. The 
observed community patterns suggest that successional dynamics following 
antibiotic treatment facilitate C. difficile establishment. The similarities 
between the microbiome responses observed in our study and those previously 
reported in CDI-infected humans further support the utility of adult pigs as 
models for the study of CDI.
