Although Clostridium difficile is widely considered an antibiotic- and 
hospital-associated pathogen, recent evidence indicates that this is an 
insufficient depiction of the risks and reservoirs. A common thread that links 
all major risk factors of infection is their association with gastrointestinal 
disturbances, but this relationship to C. difficile colonization has never been 
tested directly. Here, we show that disturbances caused by diarrhoeal events 
trigger susceptibility to C. difficile colonization. Using survey data of the 
human gut microbiome, we detected C. difficile colonization and blooms in people 
recovering from food poisoning and Vibrio cholerae infections. Carriers remained 
colonized for year-long time scales and experienced highly variable patterns of 
C. difficile abundance, where increased shedding over short periods of 1-2â€‰d 
interrupted week-long periods in which C. difficile was undetectable. Given that 
short shedding events were often linked to gastrointestinal disturbances, our 
results help explain why C. difficile is frequently detected as a co-infecting 
pathogen in patients with diarrhoea. To directly test the impact of diarrhoea on 
susceptibility to colonization, we developed a mouse model of variable 
disturbance intensity, which allowed us to monitor colonization in the absence 
of disease. As mice exposed to avirulent C. difficile spores ingested increasing 
quantities of laxatives, more individuals experienced C. difficile blooms. Our 
results indicate that the likelihood of colonization is highest in the days 
immediately following acute disturbances, suggesting that this could be an 
important window during which transmission could be interrupted and the 
incidence of infection lowered.
