Chemoresistance remains the major challenge for successful treatment of acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML). Although recent mouse studies suggest that treatment 
response of genetically and immunophenotypically indistinguishable AML can be 
influenced by their different cells of origin, corresponding evidence in human 
disease is still largely lacking. By combining prospective disease modeling 
using highly purified human hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells with 
retrospective deconvolution study of leukemia stem cells (LSCs) from primary 
patient samples, we identified human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and common 
myeloid progenitors (CMPs) as two distinctive origins of human AML driven by 
Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene fusions (MLL-AML). Despite LSCs from either 
MLL-rearranged HSCs or MLL-rearranged CMPs having a mature CD34-/lo/CD38+ 
immunophenotype in both a humanized mouse model and primary patient samples, the 
resulting AML cells exhibited contrasting responses to chemotherapy. HSC-derived 
MLL-AML was highly resistant to chemotherapy and expressed elevated amounts of 
the multispecific anion transporter ABCC3. Inhibition of ABCC3 by shRNA-mediated 
knockdown or with small-molecule inhibitor fidaxomicin, currently used for 
diarrhea associated with Clostridium difficile infection, effectively 
resensitized HSC-derived MLL-AML toward standard chemotherapeutic drugs. This 
study not only functionally established two distinctive origins of human LSCs 
for MLL-AML and their role in mediating chemoresistance but also identified a 
potential therapeutic avenue for stem cell-associated treatment resistance by 
repurposing a well-tolerated antidiarrhea drug already used in the clinic.

Copyright Â© 2021 The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government 
Works.
