Lethal toxin (LT) was purified from Clostridium sordellii IP82 by 
DEAE-Trisacryl, Ultrogel AcA3-4 gel filtration, and hydroxyapatite column 
chromatography. The molecular weight of purified LT was estimated to be 240,000 
to 250,000, and the pI was at pH 4.55. LT was lethal for mice by intraperitoneal 
injection (3.4 X 10(5) mouse lethal doses per mg of protein), cytotoxic for Vero 
cells (6.1 X 10(4) cytotoxic units per mg of protein), erythematous and 
edematous by intradermal injection in guinea pigs, and induced a moderate fluid 
accumulation in the guinea pig intestinal loop test. The lethal activity was 
inactivated by N-bromosuccinimide, N-chlorosuccinimide, chloramine-T, and sodium 
dodecyl sulfate. The data suggest that tryptophan and methionine residues 
present in the toxin are important for lethal activity. Furthermore, LT was 
inactivated by oxidized glutathione and activated by dithiothreitol. 
Inactivation by sulfhydryl-group reagents 5,5'-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid) 
and iodoacetamide was only obtained with dithiothreitol-treated LT. Thiol groups 
which are protected as a disulfide bond(s) seem to be essential for the LT 
activity. A specific antiserum against LT neutralized the biological activities 
of LT and also cytotoxic activity and lethal activity of Clostridium difficile 
toxin B but not of C. difficile toxin A. However, this serum did not recognize 
antigen from C. difficile culture supernatant by immunoblotting. It was 
concluded that antibodies prepared from C. sordellii LT that neutralized C. 
difficile cytotoxic activity recognized a low number of epitopes or tertiary 
structures of C. difficile cytotoxin.
