Since 1979, 3,115 stool samples were tested for detection of Clostridium 
difficile and its cytotoxin; these were obtained from patients who had 
drug-related diarrhea. Presumed or proven colitis due to C. difficile was 
diagnosed in 130 patients. Drugs implicated most commonly as causing or 
associated with the onset of enterocolitis due to C. difficile were ampicillin 
(38 episodes), cephalosporins (71), clindamycin (36), and the aminoglycosides 
(45). The hamster model of colitis was employed to explore the role of other 
inducing agents. Altering the usual diet of hamsters to one with a higher 
protein content decreased the time to death due to C. difficile cecitis 
following the administration of cefazolin (10 mg). Several cathartics also were 
studied for their effect on the lethality of antibiotic-induced cecitis. Daily 
administrations of castor oil (0.5 ml per day) and vegetable oil (1.0 ml per 
day) improved survival against lethal doses of clindamycin. Milk of magnesia or 
mineral oil provided no protection. Four patients with C. difficile colitis 
induced by therapy with cytotoxic drugs also were identified. Methotrexate 
induced cecitis when administered orally and daily to hamsters, and C. difficile 
and its cytotoxin were identified in the hamsters' stools. Death due to 
methotrexate-induced cecitis was prevented by daily administration of folinic 
acid or vancomycin. These data demonstrate that a variety of antibiotics, 
antineoplastic agents, cathartics, and diet changes can induce C. difficile 
colitis in humans and hamsters.
