Partially purified cytopathogenic toxin from Clostridium difficile induced 
morphological changes in five cell lines in tissue culture. The relative 
sensitivity scale of the cell lines was human lung and intestinal fibroblasts 
greater than Chinese hamster ovary cells much greater than mouse adrenal cells 
greater than mouse neuroblastoma cells. The cytopathogenic effect did not occur 
in toxin-treated lung fibroblasts incubated at 0 degree C. Pre-incubation of 
lung fibroblasts with 2,4-dinitrophenol prevented the cytopathogenic effect. The 
toxin bound to as yet unidentified receptors at the surface of human lung and 
intestinal fibroblasts. The toxin-induced morphological (actinomorphic) changes 
in lung and intestinal fibroblasts closely resembled the effects induced by the 
fungal metabolite cytochalasin B (CB), which is known to disrupt microfilaments 
reversibly. Indirect immunofluorescence with anti-actin antiserum demonstrated 
that the C. difficile toxin disrupted the straight actin filament bundles seen 
in normal fibroblasts. The cytopathogenic effect became apparent 3--5 h after 
exposure to toxin. However, irreversible intoxication occurred already within 20 
min of exposure, as toxin-treated fibroblasts which were trypsinized and 
reseeded were not able to attach to the solid substratum and regenerate their 
typical shape, a process requiring reorganization of actin into microfilament 
bundles. Two possible different modes of action of the toxin, leading to 
microfilament disruption, are suggested: 1) Transmembrane signal by 
surface-bound toxin via microfilament-linked integral membrane protein(s) and 2) 
Penetration of surface-bound whole toxin or an active fragment, followed by its 
intracellular action. The experimental evidence so far is consistent with either 
of these mechanisms.
