Clostridium difficile produces toxins that cause inflammation, necrosis, and 
fluid in the intestine and is the most important cause of nosocomial 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis. We evaluated C. difficile antigens 
as vaccines to protect against systemic and intestinal disease in a hamster 
model of clindamycin colitis. Formalin-inactivated culture filtrates from a 
highly toxigenic strain were administered by mucosal routes (intranasal, 
intragastric, and rectal) with cholera toxin as a mucosal adjuvant. A 
preparation of culture filtrate and killed whole cells was also tested rectally. 
The toxoid was also tested parenterally (subcutaneously and intraperitoneally) 
and by a combination of three intranasal immunizations followed by a combined 
intranasal-intraperitoneal boost. Serum antibodies against toxins A and B and 
whole-cell antigen were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 
neutralization of cytotoxic activity, and bacterial agglutination. The two 
rectal immunization regimens induced low antibody responses and protected only 
20% of hamsters against death and 0% against diarrhea. The intragastric regimen 
induced high antibody responses but low protection, 40% against death and 0% 
against diarrhea. Hamsters immunized by the intranasal, intraperitoneal, and 
subcutaneous routes were 100% protected against death and partially protected 
(40, 40, and 20%, respectively) against diarrhea. Among the latter groups, 
intraperitoneally immunized animals had the highest serum anticytotoxic activity 
and the highest agglutinating antibody responses. Hamsters immunized 
intranasally and revaccinated intraperitoneally were 100% protected against both 
death and diarrhea. Protection against death and diarrhea correlated with 
antibody responses to all antigens tested. The results indicate that optimal 
protection against C. difficile disease can be achieved with combined parenteral 
and mucosal immunization.
