Saccharomyces boulardii is a yeast widely used in humans for the prevention and 
treatment of infectious enteritis and Clostridium difficile-associated 
enterocolopathies. After oral administration to human volunteers or growing 
rats, S. boulardii enhances markedly the expression of intestinal enzymes as 
well as the production of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor by mechanisms 
that remain unknown. We have analyzed the role of the yeast polyamines as 
potential mediators in the intestinal trophic response. In weanling rats (d 20 
to d 30), a daily dose of 100 mg of lyophilized S. boulardii produced 
significant (p < 0.025) increases in sucrase (157%) and maltase (47%) 
activities. This dose corresponded to a total oral load of 678 nmol of 
polyamines per day (spermidine; 376 +/- 32, spermine: 293 +/- 26, putrescine: 
9.5 +/- 1.4 nmol/100 mg). Spermine, given orally to growing rats at doses nearly 
equivalent (500 nmol) to the load of polyamines provided by the yeast (678 
nmol), reproduced similar enzymatic changes, including a 2.5-fold induction of 
sucrase, and enhanced maltase activity (+24%). Spermidine and spermine 
concentrations measured in the jejunal mucosa of treated rats were increased 
over matched controls by 21.4% (p < 0.005) and 21.9%, respectively (p < 0.002). 
After being centrifuged and filtered to discard residual yeast cells, 2-mL 
samples of jejunal and ileal fluid collected from S. boulardii-treated rats by 
intestinal flushing contained higher levels of spermidine (48 and 60%) and 
spermine (150 and 316%) than did control rats. Our data indicate that 
lyophilized S. boulardii exerts trophic effects on the small intestine that are 
likely mediated by the endoluminal release of spermine and spermidine.
