The goal of this study was to determine the fecal prevalence of Clostridium 
difficile in dogs who were patients at a veterinary medical teaching hospital. 
Stool specimens collected from 152 dogs (in- and outpatients) were analyzed for 
the presence of C. difficile. An additional 42 stool specimens were collected 
and examined from dogs recently housed at local animal shelters. Following 
culture on selective medium, C. difficile was identified by a latex 
agglutination test, and the presence of the toxin A and B genes was determined 
individually by polymerase chain reaction. Clostridium difficile was isolated 
from the feces of 28 of the veterinary hospital patients (18.4%); isolates from 
14 of these patients (50.0%) were toxigenic. Diarrhea was a clinical finding in 
5 (35.7%) of the dogs carrying toxigenic isolates of C. difficile, whereas 
diarrhea was noted in only 2 of 14 dogs (14.3%) shedding nontoxigenic isolates. 
Three of 14 dogs (21.4%) shedding toxigenic isolates of C. difficile were 
receiving antibiotics at the time of stool collection, whereas 5 of 14 dogs 
(37.5%) shedding nontoxigenic strains of C. difficile were receiving 
antibiotics. The carriage rate of C. difficile was significantly higher for 
animals categorized as inpatients of the veterinary hospital. The carriage rate 
also provided evidence for an increased risk for fecal shedding with increasing 
age. Clostridium difficile was not isolated from any of the 42 dogs recently 
housed at local animal shelters. This study confirms the presence of toxigenic 
C. difficile in dogs at a veterinary teaching hospital.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)
