During inflammatory processes of the kidney, lesions of the glomerulus lead to 
aggregation of thrombocytes and infiltration of macrophages, which can release 
bioactive mediators. One of these important signalling molecules is 
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA). Incubation of rat mesangial cells with LPA induced 
mRNA and protein expression of the early-response genes pghs-2 (for 
prostaglandin G/H synthase-2/cyclo-oxygenase-2) and egr-1. As shown by antisense 
experiments, induction of egr-1 was related to the strong mitogenic effect of 
LPA. LPA-mediated gene expression was inhibited by pertussis toxin, indicating 
coupling to G-proteins of the Gi family. Specific inhibition of proteins of the 
small G-protein subfamily Rho with toxin B from Clostridium difficile led to 
changes in mesangial cell morphology without induction of apoptosis. 
LPA-mediated expression of pghs-2 and egr-1 was reduced to base-line levels by 
toxin B, indicating a role for Rho proteins in LPA-mediated gene induction. Of 
the two mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways investigated, the MAPK 
kinase-extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway was involved in the 
induction of both pghs-2 and egr-1 mRNA expression, as shown by the inhibitory 
effect of PD98059. Activation of the MAPK p38, however, was only related to 
pghs-2 expression, whereas egr-1 expression was not affected by treatment of 
mesangial cells with the specific inhibitor SB203580. Taken together our data 
provide evidence that LPA-mediated activation of MAPK kinase and Rho proteins 
leads to the induction of the functionally distinct early-response genes pghs-2 
and egr-1, whereas activation of MAPK p38 revealed considerable differences 
between the regulation of these two genes.
