Toxigenic Clostridium difficile is isolated from a majority of healthy human 
infants. The exact mechanism of asymptomatic colonisation is unclear; however, 
previous studies in this laboratory have shown that components of both the 
immunoglobulin and non-immunoglobulin fractions of human milk bind to toxin A 
and prevent its interaction with hamster intestinal brush border membranes 
(BBMs). Secretory IgA (sIgA) is the primary immunoglobulin found in human milk. 
As sIgA resists digestion in the infant stomach and passes at high levels into 
the colon, its ability to bind toxin A was the subject of this investigation. 
Purified sIgA in concentrations at and below those found in human milk inhibited 
the binding of toxin A to purified BBM receptors. Heating sIgA to 100 degrees C 
for 5 min did not affect its inhibitory activity. IgM, IgG and serum IgA did not 
appreciably inhibit the binding of toxin A to BBM receptors. SDS-PAGE separated 
sIgA into three major bands: secretory component, heavy chains and light chains. 
Autoradiography with radiolabelled toxin A revealed that toxin A bound to the 
secretory component (SC) of sIgA. When the three purified subunits of sIgA were 
coated on to microtitration wells, SC bound significantly more toxin A than the 
heavy or light chains of sIgA. Purified SC also inhibited toxin binding to 
receptors in a dose-dependent fashion similar to sIgA. The heavy and light 
chains of sIgA did not inhibit toxin A receptor binding. Removing carbohydrates 
from sIgA and SC by enzymic digestion showed that toxin A binds much less to 
deglycosylated SC than to glycosylated SC. These data suggest that SC in human 
milk binds to toxin A and may function as a receptor analogue, protecting human 
infants against C. difficile-associated disease.
