Saccharomyces boulardii is a nonpathogenic yeast used in the treatment of 
Clostridium difficile diarrhea and colitis. We have reported that S. boulardii 
inhibits C. difficile toxin A enteritis in rats by releasing a 54-kDa protease 
which digests the toxin A molecule and its brush border membrane (BBM) receptor 
(I. Castagliuolo, J. T. LaMont, S. T. Nikulasson, and C. Pothoulakis, Infect. 
Immun. 64:5225-5232, 1996). The aim of this study was to further evaluate the 
role of S. boulardii protease in preventing C. difficile toxin A enteritis in 
rat ileum and determine whether it protects human colonic mucosa from C. 
difficile toxins. A polyclonal rabbit antiserum raised against purified S. 
boulardii serine protease inhibited by 73% the proteolytic activity present in 
S. boulardii conditioned medium in vitro. The anti-protease immunoglobulin G 
(IgG) prevented the action of S. boulardii on toxin A-induced intestinal 
secretion and mucosal permeability to [3H]mannitol in rat ileal loops, while 
control rabbit IgG had no effect. The anti-protease IgG also prevented the 
effects of S. boulardii protease on digestion of toxins A and B and on binding 
of [3H]toxin A and [3H]toxin B to purified human colonic BBM. Purified S. 
boulardii protease reversed toxin A- and toxin B-induced inhibition of protein 
synthesis in human colonic (HT-29) cells. Furthermore, toxin A- and B-induced 
drops in transepithelial resistance in human colonic mucosa mounted in Ussing 
chambers were reversed by 60 and 68%, respectively, by preexposing the toxins to 
S. boulardii protease. We conclude that the protective effects of S. boulardii 
on C. difficile-induced inflammatory diarrhea in humans are due, at least in 
part, to proteolytic digestion of toxin A and B molecules by a secreted 
protease.
