Clostridium difficile is the bacterial pathogen identified as the cause of 
pseudomembranous colitis and is principally responsible for nosocomial 
antibiotic-associated diarrhea and colitis. The pathologic findings associated 
with this infection are believed to be caused by two large (approximately 
300-kDa) exotoxins, toxins A and B. Because of the mucosal nature of this 
infection, vaccination strategies aimed at providing prophylactic or therapeutic 
immune protection have included immunization by mucosal routes. Using the 
hamster model of C. difficile infection, we examined the protective efficacy of 
inactivated toxin (toxoid) vaccine formulations prepared as either culture 
filtrate or partially purified toxoid. We compared combination parenteral and 
mucosal vaccination regimens involving intranasal, intragastric, or rectal 
routes of immunization and found that rectal immunization in conjunction with 
intramuscular (i.m.) vaccination provided full protection of hamsters from death 
and diarrhea while the other mucosal routes did not. Protection was associated 
with high levels of toxin-neutralizing antibodies in serum. The requirement for 
adjuvants for protection was assessed by using sequential i.m. and rectal or 
i.m. vaccination regimens. Unexpectedly, i.m. immunization without adjuvant 
conferred the highest protection from death and diarrhea; this regimen elicited 
the highest serum anti-toxin B titers as well as toxin B neutralizing titers. 
Passive transfer of mouse antitoxin antibodies protected hamsters in a 
dose-dependent manner, demonstrating the principal role of circulating antitoxin 
antibodies in immunity from this toxin-mediated mucosal disease. These results 
suggest that prophylactic parenteral vaccination or intravenous immunotherapy 
could provide protection from C. difficile disease in humans.
