OBJECTIVES: To develop an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using as 
substrate a synthetic 22-aminoacid peptide, corresponding to the ribosomal P0, 
P1 and P2 common epitope. To study the specificity and sensitivity of the method 
and evaluate the frequency and clinical associations of anti-P antibodies in two 
groups of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients: (a) unselected SLE 
patients and (b) SLE patients with central nervous system (CNS) involvement.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The C-terminal 22 aminoacid peptide of the ribosomal P 
proteins (Lys-Lys-Glu-Glu-Lys-Lys-Glu-Glu-Lys-Ser-Glu-Glu-Glu-Asp-Glu-Asp-Met- 
Gly-Phe-Gly-Leu-Phe-Asp) was synthesised according to Merrifield's solid phase 
procedure. Purification of the peptide was performed by preparative high 
performance liquid chromatography and confirmed by amino acid analysis. Using 
this peptide, in a concentration 5 microg/ml, an ELISA was developed. The 
presence of anti-P antibodies was evaluated by western blot using purified 
ribosomal proteins from rat liver. Sera from 178 consecutive patients with SLE 
and 28 patients with SLE and CNS manifestations were tested. Sera from 58 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis and 57 patients with primary Sj√∂gren's 
syndrome were used as controls. The cut off point of the assay was defined using 
124 normal sera.
RESULTS: The specificity of the assay was evaluated by homologous inhibition. 
Pretreatment of positive sera with soluble 22mer peptide of the ribosomal P 
proteins resulted in 88% inhibition. The concordance between the peptide assay 
and western blot was found to be 83%. Thirty three of 178 (18. 6%) of the 
unselected SLE patients had antibodies to P-protein common epitope. Their 
presence was associated with more active disease (European Consensus Lupus 
Activity Measurement, ECLAM scoring system) (p<0.001), higher levels of anti-ds 
DNA antibodies (p<0.05) and lower levels of the C4 component of complement 
(p<0.01). Eleven of 28 (39.3%) patients with SLE and active CNS involvement had 
antibodies to P-protein. The overall prevalence of anti-P antibodies in active 
CNS disease patients was statistically significantly higher, as compared with 
unselected SLE patients (chi(2)=6.04, p<0.05). These antibodies were found in a 
high proportion of patients without anticardiolipin antibodies (52.4%) and they 
were associated with diffuse CNS involvement (psychiatric disorders (71%) and 
epilepsy (75%)).
CONCLUSIONS: A synthetic analogue of the common epitope of ribosomal P-proteins 
can be use as an antigen for the detection of anti-P antibodies. These 
antibodies are associated with active SLE and CNS involvement particularly in 
patients without anticardiolipin antibodies.
