Heat shock proteins are a family of approximately 25 highly conserved proteins 
upregulated in response to various forms of stress. They play an active role in 
the development autoimmune diseases in animals, and have been incriminated in 
human autoimmune diseases (i.e. rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis). It 
has been previously shown, that an induced immune response against Heat shock 
protein 65 (HSP-65) results in atherosclerotic lesions in normocholesterolemic 
rabbits. We have supported these findings showing that C57BL/6 mice immunized 
with HSP-65 and fed a high-fat diet develop enhanced fatty streaks. To create a 
model that will eliminate the need for exogenous supplementation of a high-fat 
diet, we have immunized LDL receptor deficient (LDL-RD) mice with HSP-65 or with 
heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mt). Seven groups of LDL-RD mice (n=10), 
were immunized subcutaneously with different concentrations of HSP-65, Mt or 
bovine serum albumin (BSA). All mice were fed a normal chow-diet for 3 months. 
The mice immunized with the higher doses of Mt developed significantly larger 
fatty streaks when compared with their BSA immunized littermates. The size of 
the lesions in the aortic sinus were: 31,562+/-5,994 microm(2)in the 10 microg 
Mt and 52,777+/-5,245 microm(2)in the 100 microg Mt vs. 11, 500+/-3,750 
microm(2)in the BSA group (P<0.05). In the HSP-65-immunized mice, only the group 
injected with the highest dose (5 microg, twice) developed significantly larger 
fatty streaks when compared with the BSA-immunized group (28,611+/-4,716 
microm(2)vs. 11,500+/-3,750 microm(2)respectively, (P<0.05). The HSP-65-but not 
the Mt- or BSA-immunized mice developed high titers of anti HSP-65 antibodies, 
beginning 10 days after the immunization, which persisted until they were 
killed. Immunohistochemical staining showed CD3-positive lymphocytes in the 
aortic sinus of mice immunized with Mt or HSP-65, but not in the control group. 
Thus, we established a mouse model of HSP-65 immune mediated atherosclerosis 
devoid of high fat diet supplementation. This model will enable us to further 
study the role of the immune system in atherosclerosis, via HSP-65 and raise 
novel immunomodulatory therapeutic modalities.
