Chloroquine is commonly used in the chemotherapy of malaria fever, and as an 
antiinflammatory disease-modifying agent in patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
or systemic lupus erythematosus. Administration of chloroquine (20.0 mg/kg IP) 
significantly (p < 0.05) increased the frequency of body scratching in rats to 
29.5+/-9 in 30 min, compared to saline control animals (6.5+/-2/30 min). 
Morphine, a mu-opiate receptor agonist (1.0 mg/kg IP), potentiated the 
chloroquine-induced rat body scratching to 40+/-6.6, while the mu-opiate 
receptor antagonist, naltrexone (0.25 mg/kg, IP, given 15 min prior) blocked the 
chloroquine induced body scratching to 4.5+/-2 (p < 0.05 ANOVA). In addition, 
the frequency of chloroquine (20.0 mg/kg IP)-induced body scratching was 
significantly reduced to 9.1+/-3 in 30 min in rats rendered tolerant to morphine 
(p < 0.05 ANOVA) compared to the scratching frequency of 40+/-6.6 in 
morphine-naive rats. These suggests an involvement of mu-opioid receptors and/or 
endogenous opioid peptides in chloroquine induced body scratching in rats. 
Promethazine, a histamine-receptor antagonist (1.0 mg/kg IP, given 15 min prior 
to chloroquine) and the corticosteroid, dexamethasone (1.0 mg/kg, IP, given 15 
min prior) separately and significantly (p < 0.01) inhibited the 
chloroquine-induced scratching in rats, in a similar manner to clinical studies 
in malaria. Collectively, the novel results implicate opioidergic mechanisms, 
and confirm the efficacy of antihistamine and corticosteroids in chloroquine 
body scratching in rats. It also strongly suggests that the chloroquine-induced 
body-scratching behavior in the rat may be a useful experimental model for 
chloroquine-induced pruritus in humans.
