OBJECTIVE: Weekly low-dose methotrexate (MTX) remains the mainstay of 
second-line therapy for rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We have previously reported 
that adenosine, acting at specific receptors on inflammatory cells, mediates the 
antiinflammatory effects of MTX in both in vitro and in vivo models of acute 
inflammation, but the mechanism by which MTX suppresses the chronic inflammation 
of arthritis remains controversial. The present study was undertaken to further 
investigate the means by which adenosine mediates the antiinflammatory effects 
of MTX.
METHODS: The effects of 2 nonselective adenosine receptor antagonists, 
theophylline and caffeine, were examined, using the rat adjuvant arthritis model 
of RA. These agents were given alone and in conjunction with MTX, and arthritis 
severity was assessed clinically, radiologically, and histologically. Since 
rodent adenosine A3 receptors are not blocked by theophylline, selective A1, 
A2A, and A2B receptor antagonists were tested as well.
RESULTS: Control animals developed severe arthritis, which was markedly 
attenuated by weekly treatment with MTX (0.75 mg/kg/week). Neither theophylline 
alone nor caffeine alone (each at 10 mg/kg/day) significantly affected the 
severity of the arthritis, but both agents markedly reversed the effect of MTX 
as measured by a severity index, hindpaw swelling, and hindpaw ankylosis. 
Radiographic and histologic analyses confirmed these observations. Neither A1, 
A2A, nor A2B receptor antagonists affected the capacity of MTX to ameliorate 
inflammation in adjuvant arthritis.
CONCLUSION: These results provide strong evidence that adenosine mediates the 
antiinflammatory effects of MTX in this model of RA. Moreover, the findings 
suggest that abstinence from caffeine, a ubiquitous food additive and 
medication, may enhance the therapeutic effects of MTX in RA.
