Squalene is a cholesterol precursor, which stimulates the immune system 
nonspecifically. We demonstrate that one intradermal injection of this adjuvant 
lipid can induce joint-specific inflammation in arthritis-prone DA rats. 
Histopathological and immunohistochemical analyses revealed erosion of bone and 
cartilage, and that development of polyarthritis coincided with infiltration of 
alphabeta(+) T cells. Depletion of these cells with anti-alphabeta TcR 
monoclonal antibody (R73) resulted in complete recovery, whereas anti-CD8 and 
anti-gammadelta TcR injections were ineffective. The apparent dependence on 
CD4(+) T cells suggested a role for genes within the major histocompatibility 
complex (MHC), and this was concluded from comparative studies of MHC congenic 
rat strains, in which DA.1H rats were less susceptible than DA rats. 
Furthermore, LEW.1AV1 and PVG.1AV1 rats with MHC identical to DA rats were 
arthritis-resistant, demonstrating that non-MHC genes also determine 
susceptibility. Some of these genetic influences could be linked to previously 
described arthritis susceptibility loci in an F2 intercross between DA and 
LEW.1AV1 rats (ie, Cia3, Oia2 and Cia5). Interestingly, some F2 hybrid rats 
developed chronic arthritis, a phenotype not apparent in the parental inbred 
strains. Our demonstration that an autoadjuvant can trigger chronic, 
immune-mediated joint-specific inflammation may give clues to the pathogenesis 
of rheumatoid arthritis, and it raises new questions concerning the role of 
endogenous molecules with adjuvant properties in chronic inflammatory diseases.
