OBJECTIVE: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is a polygenic model of 
experimentally induced autoimmunity and chronic joint inflammation. This study 
maps genetic loci that regulate CIA susceptibility in DA/Bkl (DA) and BN/SsNHsd 
(BN) rats.
METHODS: Genome scans covering chromosomes 1-20 and interval mapping techniques 
using 159 simple sequence-length polymorphism markers were used to identify 
quantitative trait loci (QTLs) that regulate CIA in (DA x BN)F2 hybrids. Serum 
antibody titers to type II collagen were determined by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: DA rats were high responders to porcine type II collagen (PII) and 
developed severe CIA (100%). BN rats were low responders to PII and resistant to 
CIA (0%). BN genes strongly repressed PII-induced CIA. Only 12% of (DA x BN)F1 
rats (7 of 60) and 31% of (DA x BN)F2 rats (307 of 1,004) developed CIA. Three 
new QTLs (Cia11, Cia12, and Cia13) with significant logarithm of odds (LOD) 
scores of 5.6, 4.6, and 4.5, respectively, plus a suggestive QTL (Cia14*, LOD 
3.0) regulating arthritis severity were identified on chromosomes 3, 12, 4, and 
19. A new QTL, Ciaa3, associating with anticollagen antibody titer (antibody to 
PII LOD 6.5; antibody to rat type II collagen LOD 5.2) mapped to chromosome 9. 
Of 10 CIA QTLs previously identified in (DA x F344) and (DA x ACI) rats, only 
Cia1 in the major histocompatibility complex and a region coincident to Cia5 on 
chromosome 10 (LOD >8.0) influenced CIA severity in (DA x BN)F2 rats.
CONCLUSION: Since CIA exhibits many of the pathologic features of rheumatoid 
arthritis, the data indicate that the variety of genetic elements regulating 
human autoimmune and rheumatic diseases may be much larger and more varied than 
originally envisioned.
