Rat Chromosome 10 (RNO10) harbors Cia5, a non-MHC quantitative trait locus (QTL) 
that regulates the severity of type II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in 
DAxF344 and DAxBN F2 rats. CIA is an animal model with many features that 
resemble rheumatoid arthritis. To facilitate analysis of Cia5 independently of 
the other CIA regulatory loci on other chromosomes, DA recombinant QTL speed 
congenic rats, DA.F344(Cia5), were generated. These QTL congenic rats have a 
large chromosomal segment containing Cia5 (interval size < or =80.1 cM) from 
CIA-resistant F344 rats introgressed into their genome. Phenotypic analyses of 
these rats for susceptibility and severity of CIA confirmed that Cia5 is an 
important disease-modifying locus. CIA severity was significantly lower in the 
Cia5 congenic rats than in DA controls. We also generated DA Cia5 speed 
sub-congenic rats, DA.F344(Cia5a), which had a smaller segment of the F344 
genome, Cia5a, comprising only the distal q-telomeric end (interval size < or = 
22.5 cM) of Cia5, introgressed into their genome. DA.F344(Cia5a) sub-congenic 
rats also exhibited reduced CIA disease severity compared with the parental DA 
rats. The regulatory effects in both congenic strains were sex influenced. The 
disease-ameliorating effect of the larger fragment, Cia5, was greater in males 
than in females, but the effect of the smaller fragment, Cia5a, was greater in 
females. We also present an improved genetic linkage map covering the Cia5/Cia5a 
region, which we have integrated with two rat radiation hybrid maps. Comparative 
homology analysis of this genomic region with mouse and human chromosomes was 
also undertaken. Regulatory loci for multiple autoimmune/inflammatory diseases 
in rats (RNO10), mice (MMU11), and humans (HSA17 and HSA5q23-q31) map to 
chromosomal segments homologous to Cia5 and Cia5a.
