Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common, chronic, autoimmune, inflammatory disease 
that is influenced by genetic factors including gender. Many studies suggest 
that the genetic risk for RA is determined by the MHC, in particular class II 
alleles with a 'shared epitope' (SE), and multiple non-MHC loci. Other studies 
indicate that RA and other autoimmune diseases, in particular insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and autoimmune thyroid disease (ATD), share genetic 
risk factors. Rat collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is an experimental model with 
many features that resemble RA. The spontaneous diabetes-resistant bio-breeding 
rat, BB(DR), is of interest because it is susceptible to experimentally induced 
CIA, IDDM and ATD, and it has an SE in its MHC class II allele. To explore the 
genetics of CIA, including potential gender influences and the genetic 
relationships between CIA and other autoimmune diseases, we conducted a 
genome-wide scan for CIA regulatory loci in the F(2) progeny of BB(DR) and 
CIA-resistant BN rats. We identified 10 quantitative trait loci (QTLs), 
including 5 new ones (Cia15, Cia16*, Cia17, Cia18* and Cia19 on chromosomes 9, 
10, 18 and two on the X chromosome, respectively), that regulated CIA severity. 
We also identified four QTLs, including two new ones (Ciaa4* and Ciaa5* on 
chromosomes 4 and 5, respectively), that regulated autoantibody titer to rat 
type II collagen. Many of these loci appeared to be gender influenced, and most 
co-localized with several other autoimmune trait loci. Our data support the view 
that multiple autoimmune diseases may share genetic risk factors, and suggest 
that many of these loci are gender influenced.
