OBJECTIVE: We assessed the clinical and histologic features of angiogenesis 
inhibition in a transgenic mouse model of arthritis that closely resembles 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in humans.
METHODS: KRN/NOD mice, which spontaneously develop arthritis, were treated with 
TNP-470, an angiogenesis inhibitor. Disease was monitored by use of clinical 
indices and histologic examinations; circulating blood levels of vascular 
endothelial growth factor were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: In the preventive protocol, with TNP-470 administration at a dosage of 
60 mg/kg of body weight, the onset of arthritis was delayed and its clinical 
intensity was rather mild; 100% of placebo-treated transgenic mice developed 
arthritis that led to severe articular destruction. At a dosage of 90 mg/kg of 
TNP-470, the appearance of clinical signs was delayed for a longer period of 
time and disease was almost abolished. The therapeutic regimen alleviated 
clinical signs only when given during the very early stage of disease. 
Reductions in cartilage and bone destruction by TNP-470 treatment were observed 
histologically, a feature that was still evident at 30 and 80 days after 
injections were withdrawn.
CONCLUSION: Our demonstration that in vivo administration of an angiogenesis 
inhibitor suppresses arthritis and protects from bone destruction provides new 
insight into the pathogenesis of the disease and opens new possibilities in the 
treatment of RA in humans.
