Adhesion mechanisms play a major role in the recruitment of peripheral blood 
lymphocytes (PBL) which characteristically infiltrate rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
synovium and other chronically inflamed tissues. Through a sequential series of 
complex integrated adhesion and signalling events, 'multistep model of 
migration', specific subsets of PBL are recruited into inflamed tissues. In this 
process both leucocyte receptors and microvascular endothelial (MVE) 
counter-receptors play a critical role. The MVE in particular, during an 
inflammatory state, is the target of various inflammatory mediators that cause 
the up-regulation of several cell adhesion molecules (CAM). One of the most 
important factors known to be a powerful inducer of MVE CAM is TNF-alpha. 
Conversely, blocking TNF-alpha causes a down-modulation of CAM expression. To 
test directly the capacity of TNF-alpha to induce cell migration into RA 
synovium we adapted a model in which synovial grafts were implanted into SCID 
mice subcutaneously. Using this model we demonstrate that: (i) transplants 
remain viable and become vascularized and fed by mouse subdermal vessels; (ii) 
the mouse vasculature connects to the transplant vasculature which maintains the 
ability to express human CAM; (iii) intragraft injections of TNF-alpha 
up-regulate the expression of human CAM, following the down-regulation which 
occurred 4 weeks post-transplantation; and (iv) the up-regulation of graft CAM 
is associated with increased human PBL migration into the transplants. This 
study provides direct evidence in vivo of the capacity of TNF-alpha to induce 
cell migration. In addition, it provides the experimental background for the 
optimal use of this model.
