Proteoglycan-induced arthritis (PGIA) is a murine model for rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) both in terms of its pathology and its genetics. PGIA can only be induced 
in susceptible mouse strains and their F(2) progeny. Using the F(2) hybrids 
resulting from an F(1) intercross of a newly identified susceptible (C3H/HeJCr) 
and an established resistant (C57BL/6) strain of mouse, our goals were to: 1) 
identify the strain-specific loci that confer PGIA susceptibility, 2) determine 
whether any pathophysiological parameters could be used as markers that 
distinguish between nonarthritic and arthritic mice, and 3) analyze the effect 
of the MHC haplotype on quantitative trait loci (QTL) detection. To identify 
QTLs, we performed a genome scan on the F(2) hybrids. For pathophysiological 
analyses, we measured pro- and antiinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, 
IFN-gamma, IL-4, IL-10, IL-12, Ag-specific T cell proliferation and IL-2 
production, serum IgG1 and IgG2 levels of both auto- and heteroantibodies, and 
soluble CD44. We have identified four new PGIA-linked QTLs (Pgia13 through 
Pgia16) and confirmed two (Pgia5, Pgia10) from our previous study. All new 
MHC-independent QTLs were associated with either disease onset or severity. 
Comprehensive statistical analysis demonstrated that while soluble CD44, IL-6, 
and IgG1 vs. IgG2 heteroantibody levels differed significantly between the 
arthritic and nonarthritic groups, only Ab-related parameters colocalized with 
the QTLs. Importantly, the mixed haplotype (H-2(b) and H-2(k)) of the C3H x 
C57BL/6 F(2) intercross reduced the detection of several previously identified 
QTLs to suggestive levels, indicating a masking effect of unmatched MHCs.
