OBJECTIVE: Angiogenesis, the growth of new blood vessels, is vital to the 
ingress of inflammatory leukocytes in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovial tissue 
and to the growth and proliferation of RA pannus. The factors that mediate the 
growth of new blood vessels have not been completely defined. This study 
examined the ability of Glu-Leu-Arg (ELR)-containing chemokines to induce 
angiogenesis in the RA joint.
METHODS: To reflect angiogenic activity in vivo, we selected a model using whole 
human synovial tissue rather than isolated cells. Tissues were examined by 
immunohistochemistry and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and tissue 
homogenates were immunoneutralized and assayed for their ability to induce 
endothelial cell chemotaxis and rat corneal neovascularization.
RESULTS: Cells expressing interleukin-8 (IL-8) and epithelial neutrophil 
activating peptide 78 (ENA-78) were located in proximity to factor VIII-related 
antigen-immunopositive endothelial cells. RA homogenates produced more IL-8 and 
ENA-78 compared with normal synovial tissue homogenates. Moreover, homogenates 
from RA synovial tissue produced significantly more chemotactic activity for 
endothelial cells in vitro and angiogenic activity in the rat cornea in vivo 
than did normal synovial tissue homogenates. The effects of IL-8 and ENA-78 
accounted for a significant proportion of the chemotactic activity of 
endothelial cells and angiogenic activity found in RA synovial tissue 
homogenates.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the ELR-containing chemokines IL-8 and 
ENA-78 are important contributors to the angiogenic activity found in the 
inflamed RA joint. It is possible that efforts aimed at down-regulating these 
chemokines offer a novel targeted therapy for the treatment of RA.
