Several quantitative trait loci (QTLs) regulating the risk of experimental 
arthritis have been identified by genome-wide linkage analyses, but only the MHC 
has thus far been reported to transfer arthritis susceptibility in congenic 
animals. We have produced a congenic strain for Oia3, a genetic factor 
originally identified as an oil-induced arthritis (OIA) QTL in arthritis-prone 
DA rats. A 46 cM telomeric region of chromosome 10 encompassing Oia3 was 
transferred from DA rats to MHC-identical but minutely arthritis-susceptible 
LEW.1AV1 rats by selective breeding. Arthritis development was provoked in 
Oia3-congenic rats by intradermal injection of different adjuvant oils. One 
successful arthritis trigger was squalene, which is approved for vaccinations in 
humans and has been implicated in Gulf War syndrome. The endogenous cholesterol 
precursor squalene induced T cell infiltration into joints and macroscopic 
arthritis in Oia3-congenic rats and DA rats, whereas LEW.1AV1 rats were almost 
resistant. Arthritis onset, approximately 14 days post-injection, coincided with 
arrested body-weight gain and increased plasma levels of the inflammation 
markers fibrinogen and alpha 1-acid glycoprotein. Congenic rats displayed 
intermediate phenotypes compared with the two parental strains, and similar to 
rheumatoid arthritis in humans, female preponderance was observed in 
Oia3-congenic rats. Finally, recombinant rat strains were constructed and were 
used to map a susceptibility gene(s) in females to a telomeric 4--19 cM Oia3 
subregion. The experimental system described allows transformation of 
multifactorial arthritis susceptibility into dichotomous phenotypes.
