Creatine kinase (CK) was used as a marker molecule to examine the side effect of 
damage to tissues by indomethacin (IM), an effective drug to treat rheumatoid 
arthritis and gout, with horseradish peroxidase and hydrogen peroxide 
(HRP-H2O2). IM inactivated CK during its interaction with HRP-H2O2. Under 
aerobic conditions, inactivation of CK significantly decreased. CK in rat heart 
homogenate was also inactivated by IM with HRP-H2O2. When IM was incubated with 
HRP-H2O2, the maximum absorption of IM at 280 nm rapidly decreased and a new 
peak at 410 nm occurred with isosbestic points at 260 and 312 nm. In contrast, 
under anaerobic conditions, the spectral change of IM was almost absent, 
indicating IM was oxidized to the yellow substance by HRP-H2O2. Adding catalase 
strongly inhibited the production of yellow substance. Sodium azide also blocked 
the formation of yellow substance and the inactivation of CK. Electron spin 
resonance signals of IM carbon-centered radical were detected using 
2-methyl-2-nitrosopropane during the interaction of IM with HRP-H2O2 under 
anaerobic conditions. Oxygen was consumed during the interaction of IM with 
HRP-H2O2. These results suggest that IM carbon-centered radicals may rapidly 
react with O2 to generate the peroxyl radicals. Sulfhydryl groups and 
tryptophane residues of CK decreased during the interaction of IM with HRP-H2O2. 
Other sulfhydryl enzymes, including alcohol dehydrogenase and 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, were also readily inactivated during 
the interaction with HRP-H2O2. Sulfhydryl enzymes seem to be very sensitive to 
IM activated by HRP-H2O2.
