Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are involved in inflammation 
and tissue destruction in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In particular, c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) is highly activated in RA fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
and synovium. However, defining the precise function of this kinase has been 
difficult because a selective JNK inhibitor has not been available. We now 
report the use of a novel selective JNK inhibitor and JNK knockout mice to 
determine the function of JNK in synoviocyte biology and inflammatory arthritis. 
The novel JNK inhibitor SP600125 (anthra[1,9-cd]pyrazol-6(2H)-one) completely 
blocked IL-1--induced accumulation of phospho-Jun and induction of c-Jun 
transcription in synoviocytes. Furthermore, AP-1 binding and collagenase mRNA 
accumulation were completely suppressed by SP600125. In contrast, complete 
inhibition of p38 had no effect, and ERK inhibition had only a modest effect. 
The essential role of JNK was confirmed in cultured synoviocytes from JNK1 
knockout mice and JNK2 knockout mice, each of which had a partial defect in 
IL-1--induced AP-1 activation and collagenase-3 expression. Administration of 
SP600125 modestly decreased the rat paw swelling in rat adjuvant-induced 
arthritis. More striking was the near-complete inhibition of radiographic damage 
that was associated with decreased AP-1 activity and collagenase-3 gene 
expression. Therefore, JNK is a critical MAPK pathway for IL-1--induced 
collagenase gene expression in synoviocytes and in joint arthritis, indicating 
that JNK is an important therapeutic target for RA.
