In this report we describe the purification of human superficial zone protein 
(SZP), the generation of cross-species monoclonal antibodies (MAbs) and the 
detection of this protein in human and animal body fluids. Human SZPs, used as 
immunizing antigens, were purified either from culture media of human cartilage 
organ cultures or from human synovial fluids. The immunizing antigens were mixed 
with RIBI adjuvant in one of three forms: nonmodified SZP, superficial zone 
protein-keyhole limpet hemocyanin conjugate (SZP-KLH), or a mixture of 
superficial zone protein and hyaluronic acid (SZP-HA). A panel of MAbs including 
GW4.23, S6.79, S13.52, S13.233, and S17.109 were generated and characterized. 
Monoclonal antibody (MAb) S6.79, an IgG2b with K(D) 3.14 x 10(-9) M from SZP-KLH 
immunization, is of particular interest. It reacts strongly to a large molecular 
weight form of SZP in both enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Western 
blotting. It stains the most superficial layer of articular cartilage in 
immunohistochemistry, whereas the middle and deep zones of cartilage are not 
stained. When MAb S6.79 was applied to Western blots of human body fluids, a 
strong 345-kDa band was detected in samples of synovial fluid and weaker bands 
of similar size were detected in samples of plasma and serum. MAb S6.79 also 
showed cross-species immunoreactivity with SZP in samples of synovial fluids 
harvested from bovine, dog, guinea pig, and rabbit, as demonstrated by Western 
blotting and antibody absorption experiments. This cross-species MAb will be a 
useful tool in human and animal model studies for monitoring SZP levels and 
tissue distribution. It may help define the roles of SZP in normal articular 
joints and may be of diagnostic or prognostic value for the measurement of SZP 
in pathological conditions such as osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis.
