Neutrophils are prominent participants in the joint inflammation of human 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, but the extent of their role in the 
inductive phase of joint inflammation is unknown. In the K/BxN mouse RA model, 
transfer of autoreactive Ig from the K/BxN mouse into mice induces a rapid and 
profound joint-specific inflammatory response reminiscent of human RA. We 
observed that after K/BxN serum transfer, the earliest clinical signs of 
inflammation in the ankle joint correlated with the presence of neutrophils in 
the synovial regions of recipient mouse ankle joints. In this study, we 
investigated the role of neutrophils in the early inflammatory response to 
transferred arthritogenic serum from the K/BxN transgenic mouse. Mice were 
treated with a neutrophil-depleting mAb before and following transfer of 
arthritogenic serum and scored for clinical indications of inflammation and 
severity of swelling in ankle joints and front paws. In the absence of 
neutrophils, mice were completely resistant to the inflammatory effects of K/BxN 
serum. Importantly, depletion of neutrophils in diseased recipient mice up to 5 
days after serum transfer reversed the inflammatory reaction in the joints. 
Transfer of serum into mice deficient in the generation of nitrogen or oxygen 
radicals (inducible NO synthase 2 or gp91(phox) genes, respectively) gave normal 
inflammatory responses, indicating that neither pathway is essential for disease 
induction. These studies have identified a critical role for neutrophils in 
initiating and maintaining inflammatory processes in the joint.
