There is mounting evidence for a role of the growth factor 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) in inflammatory 
disease, including arthritis. In the present study, we examined the 
effectiveness of treatment of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) with a 
neutralizing mAb to GM-CSF. DBA/1 mice were immunized for the development of CIA 
and treated at different times, and with different doses, with neutralizing mAb 
to GM-CSF or isotype control mAb. Anti-GM-CSF mAb treatment prior to the onset 
of arthritis, at the time of antigen challenge, was effective at ameliorating 
the ensuing disease. Modulation of arthritis was seen predominantly as a 
reduction in overall disease severity, both in terms of the number of limbs 
affected per mouse and the clinical score of affected limbs. Importantly, 
anti-GM-CSF mAb treatment ameliorated existing disease, seen both as a reduction 
in the number of initially affected limbs progressing and lower numbers of 
additional limbs becoming affected. By histology, both inflammation and 
cartilage destruction were reduced in anti-GM-CSF-treated mice, and the levels 
of tumor necrosis factor-a and IL-1beta were also reduced in joint tissue 
washouts of these mice. Neither humoral nor cellular immunity to type II 
collagen, however, was affected by anti-GM-CSF mAb treatment. These results 
suggest that the major effect of GM-CSF in CIA is on mediating the effector 
phase of the inflammatory reaction to type II collagen. The results also 
highlight the essential role of GM-CSF in the ongoing development of 
inflammation and arthritis in CIA, with possible therapeutic implications for 
rheumatoid arthritis.
