Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an oligogenic autoimmune disease but, to date, 
linkage and association to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) has been the 
only consistent finding in genetic studies. However, MHC is estimated to 
contribute only 30-40% of the total genetic component to disease susceptibility. 
Studies in animal models of inflammatory arthritis have identified a number of 
putative vulnerability loci but the homologous regions in the human genome have 
not previously been investigated as candidate RA susceptibility loci. We have 
investigated linkage to five regions homologous to those identified in animal 
models of inflammatory arthritis in RA affected sibling pair (ASP) families. 
Linkage to 17q22 syntenic to a susceptibility locus common to two experimental 
rat models was detected in 200 RA ASP families and replicated in a further 100 
RA ASP families. Linkage to additional markers mapping to the area has refined 
the extent of linkage to a 4 cM region. Association to one of the markers 
(D17S807) was demonstrated in this cohort using extensions of the transmission 
disequilibrium test. Association to two 2-marker haplotypes including this 
marker was detected in an independent cohort of single-case RA families, thus 
narrowing the region harbouring the aetiological mutation to approximately 1 cM. 
This is the first time that an arthritis susceptibility locus mapped in 
experimental animal models of disease has been used to identify a novel RA 
susceptibility locus in humans. The difficult task of identifying a disease 
mutation from a linkage result should, in this case at least, be facilitated by 
the combined use of animal and human based investigations.
