PTHrP, a peptide induced in parenchymal organs during endotoxemia and in the 
synovium in rheumatoid arthritis, has recently been shown to be expressed in 
immature or transformed human astrocytes, but not in normal cells. This finding 
has led us to postulate that PTHrP might also be induced in reactive astrocytes 
in inflamed brain and, thus, act as a mediator of CNS inflammation. To test this 
hypothesis, PTHrP expression was examined following cortical stab wound injury 
in rats, a classical model of reactive gliosis. To determine whether PTHrP was 
induced in glia by TNF-alpha, a known mediator of inflammation in brain and of 
PTHrP induction in peripheral tissues, and to determine whether PTHrP, in turn, 
mediated inflammatory changes in glia, in vitro studies with rat astrocytes and 
glial-enriched mixed brain cells were also undertaken. Consistent with previous 
reports of PTHrP expression in normal brain, neurons were the primary site of 
immunoreactive PTHrP expression in the injured cortex 1 day after stab wound 
injury. Over the subsequent 3 days, specific immunostaining for PTHrP and for 
GFAP, a marker of reactive astrocytes, appeared in reactive astrocytes at the 
wound edge and in perivascular astrocytes, reaching a maximum level of 
expression at the last time point examined (day 4). TNF-alpha induced PTHrP 
expression in astrocyte and glial-enriched brain cells in vitro, suggesting that 
this pro-inflammatory peptide was a possible mediator of PTHrP expression in CNS 
inflammation. PTHrP(1-34) acted in an additive fashion with TNF-alpha to induced 
astrocyte expression of IL-6, a cytokine with demonstrated neuroprotective 
effects. Astrocyte proliferation was inhibited by PTHrP(1-34) and PTHrP(1-141), 
acting via a PTH/PTHrP receptor cAMP signaling pathway. These studies suggest 
that PTHrP, analogous to its regulatory functions in other non-CNS models of 
inflammation, may be an important mediator of the inflammatory response in 
brain.
