The transcription factor NF-kappaB is of major importance in the biology of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-alpha and IL-1alpha, and thereby is 
intimately involved in the process of inflammation. Understanding the mechanisms 
by which NF-kappaB is activated in response to inflammatory stimuli has become a 
major goal of inflammation research. The discovery of NF-kappaB-inducing kinase 
(NIK) as a TNFR-associated factor-interacting enzyme and a potential activator 
of the IkappaBalpha-kinase complex appeared to have identified an important 
element of the NF-kappaB activation pathway, a view that was supported by 
several subsequent studies. However, recent experiments in the alymphoplasia 
(aly/aly) mouse, which has missense point mutation (G885R) in NIK, has 
challenged that view. The reasons for the discrepancy between the different 
studies is unclear and could be due to multiple factors, such as cell type, 
species of cell, or primary vs transformed cell lines. One system that has not 
been investigated is primary human cells. Using an adenoviral vector encoding 
kinase-deficient NIK, we have investigated the role of NIK in LPS, IL-1, 
TNF-alpha, and lymphotoxin (LT) betaR signaling in primary human cells and 
TNF-alpha expression from rheumatoid tissue. These data show that, in the 
primary systems tested, NIK has a restricted role in LTbetaR signaling and is 
not required by the other stimuli tested. Also, there is no apparent role for 
NIK in the process of TNF-alpha production in human rheumatoid arthritis. These 
data also highlight the potential problems in extrapolating the function of 
signaling pathways between primary and transfected cell lines.
