Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a systemic inflammatory disease of unknown etiology, 
mainly affects synovial joints. Although angiogenic growth factors, including 
fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) and vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF), may play a critical role in the development and progression of RA joint 
disease, little information is now available regarding their exact role in 
initiation and/or progression of RA. In this study, we show that both 
polypeptides were up-regulated in the rat joint synovial tissue of an 
adjuvant-induced model of arthritis (AIA), as well as human subjects with RA. 
FGF-2 overexpression via Sendai virus-mediated gene transfer significantly 
worsened clinical symptoms and signs of rat AIA, including hind paw swelling and 
radiological bone destruction, as well as histological findings based on 
inflammatory reaction, synovial angiogenesis, pannus formation, and 
osteocartilaginous destruction, associated with up-regulation of endogenous 
VEGF. FGF-2 gene transfer to non-AIA joints was without effect. These findings 
suggested that FGF-2 modulated disease progression, but did not affect 
initiation. Reverse experiments using anti-FGF-2-neutralizing rabbit IgG 
attenuated clinical symptoms and histopathological abnormalities of AIA joints. 
To our knowledge, this is the first report indicating direct in vivo evidence of 
disease-modulatory effects of FGF-2 in AIA, as probably associated with 
endogenous VEGF function. FGF-2 may prove to be a possible therapeutic target to 
treat subjects with RA.
