The effects of an important new anti-inflammatory agent, the selective 
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor celecoxib, on bone resorption and osteoclastogenesis 
elicited by the inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) and tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), the endotoxin lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and 
the systemic hormones 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) and parathyroid hormone 
were examined in vitro. Bone resorption was evaluated by measuring calcium 
released into the culture medium in a neonatal mouse calvarial bone organ 
culture. Osteoclastogenesis was evaluated by measuring tartrate-resistant acid 
phosphatase activity in the cells in cocultures of bone marrow cells and 
osteoblastic cells and in macrophage-colony-stimulating factor-dependent bone 
marrow cell cultures. Celecoxib (0.1 microM) completely inhibited the calcium 
release induced by IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and LPS. The resorptive effect of 
1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) was inhibited partially by celecoxib. In 
contrast, celecoxib did not inhibit the calcium release elicited by parathyroid 
hormone or prostaglandin E(2). Celecoxib (0.1 microM) also markedly inhibited 
osteoclastogenesis induced by these stimulators of bone resorption except for 
PGE(2) in the coculture system, whereas it failed to inhibit osteoclastogenesis 
in macrophage-colony-stimulating factor-dependent bone marrow cell cultures. 
These results indicate that, under certain conditions, 
cyclooxygenase-2-dependent prostaglandin synthesis is critical for the bone 
resorption induced by IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and LPS, and for the 
osteoclastogenesis induced by these pro-inflammatory molecules and calciotropic 
hormones. The prevention of prostaglandin synthesis by inflammatory cytokines in 
bone cells could contribute to the efficacy of celecoxib in preventing bone loss 
in rheumatoid arthritis.
