The K/BxN murine model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is dependent on the 
specificity of the KRN alpha beta-TCR, to recognize 
glucose-6-phosphate-isomerase (GPI) on the NOD MHC class II A(g7) allele and 
production of GPI-specific autoantibodies. Transfer of K/BxN serum into 
MHC-unrelated and lymphocyte-deficient mice induces RA. To investigate whether 
K/BxN serum-induced RA involves complement activation and/or the complement 
receptors (CR) 1 and 2, we analyzed the role of complement C4 and of CR1 and 
CR2. For this purpose we used C4(-/-) mice impaired in the classical and the 
lectin complement pathways; Cr2(-/-) mice lacking CR1 and CR2 and, as control 
strains, BALB/c, C57BL/6, KRN and NOD. RA was assessed by caliper measurement of 
ankle thickness, clinical index and joint histology. We found that all mouse 
strains except NOD developed RA. The lack of protection in C4(-/-) mice suggests 
that antibody-mediated RA is independent of the classical as well as the lectin 
complement pathways and the split complement product C4b. The lack of protection 
in Cr2(-/-) mice suggests that absence of CR1 had no significant affect, 
considering its role in immune complex clearance, inhibition of C3 and C5 
convertase and as receptor for C3b/C4b. Also, CR2 lacks a role in disease as 
analyzed here, in its possible functions as receptor for C3dg, germinal center 
reaction and activation of alternative pathway on binding iC3. Hence we conclude 
that the transmission of K/BxN serum-induced RA is independent of the classical 
and the lectin complement pathways and CR1 and CR2. The crucial role of 
complement C5, while neither classical nor lectin pathway is necessary, 
indicates that the alternative complement pathway may have a role in the K/BxN 
serum-induced RA model.
