Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) plays a critical role in innate immunity. Point 
mutations in the collagen-like domain (R32C, G34D, or G37E) of MBL cause a serum 
deficiency, predisposing patients to infections and diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis. We examined whether MBL mutants show enhanced susceptibility to 
proteolysis by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are important mediators 
in inflammatory tissue destruction. Human and rat MBL were resistant to 
proteolysis in the native state but were cleaved selectively within the 
collagen-like domain by multiple MMPs after heat denaturation. In contrast, rat 
MBL with mutations homologous to those of the human variants (R23C, G25D, or 
G28E) was cleaved efficiently without denaturation in the collagen-like domain 
by MMP-2 and MMP-9 (gelatinases A and B) and MMP-14 (membrane type-1 MMP), as 
well as by MMP-1 (collagenase-1), MMP-8 (neutrophil collagenase), MMP-3 
(stromelysin-1), neutrophil elastase, and bacterial collagenase. Sites and order 
of cleavage of the rat MBL mutants for MMP-2 and MMP-9 were: Gly(45)-Lys(46) --> 
Gly(51)-Ser(52) --> Gly(63)-Gln(64) --> Asn(80)-Met(81) which differed from that 
of MMP-14, Gly(39)-Leu(40) --> Asn(80)-Met(81), revealing that the MMPs were not 
functionally interchangeable. These sites were homologous to those cleaved in 
denatured human MBL. Hence, perturbation of the collagen-like structure of MBL 
by natural mutations or by denaturation renders MBL susceptible to MMP cleavage. 
MMPs are likely to contribute to MBL deficiency in individuals with variant 
alleles and may also be involved in clearance of MBL and modulation of the host 
response in normal individuals.
