T-cell mediated inflammatory joint diseases with similarities to rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) can be triggered in arthritis-prone rat strains by intradermal 
injection of adjuvant oils. The pathogenesis of oil-induced arthritis (OIA) 
remains elusive, and a largely unresolved question is how the rat immune system 
responds to arthritogenic oils such as incomplete Freund's adjuvant (IFA). Here 
we report that IFA already induces increased plasma levels of the acute-phase 
reactants (APR) fibrinogen and alpha1-acid glycoprotein at day 4 postinjection 
(p.i). In contrast, no early responses were detected in the joints before 
infiltration of the T cells, which coincided with arthritis onset at 11-14 days 
post injection (d.p.i.) The infiltrating cells were possibly derived from 
draining lymph nodes (LN), which were hyperplastic and contained increased cell 
numbers from 4 days p.i. and onwards. The magnitude of the early increase in 
cell numbers and APR was regulated by non-major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
genes, as determined by comparison between arthritis-susceptible DA rats and 
arthritis-resistant but MHC-identical LEW.lAV1 and PVG.1AV1 rats. Arthritisprone 
DA rats developed a weak acute-phase response, suggesting that this systemic 
response may be counteracting disease. The DA rats also had the largest early 
increase in LN-cell numbers, suggesting that the LN hyperplasia is part of a 
disease pathway. The analysis of hyperplastic LN after in vivo labelling with 
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) revealed increased numbers and proportions of 
proliferating lymphocytes, including T cells. Furthermore, polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR)-analysis of LN cytokine mRNA revealed upregulation of interleukin 
(IL)-1beta at 4 d.p.i. We conclude that adjuvant oil exposure triggers both 
systemic acute phase reactions and local activation of the peripheral lymphoid 
system. These responses are genetically regulated and may determine arthritis 
development and susceptibility.
