Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic disorder characterized by synovial 
inflammation and subsequent destruction and deformity of synovial joints. The 
articular lesions start with synovitis, focal erosion of unmineralized 
cartilage, and then culminate in the destruction of subarticular bone by pannus 
tissue. Periarticular osteopenia and systemic osteoporosis follow as late 
complications of RA. Osteoclasts, specialized cells that resorb bone, play a 
central role in developing these osteolytic lesions. To elucidate the mechanism 
of osteoclastogenesis and bone destruction in autoimmune arthritis, we 
investigated the expression of RANK ligand (RANKL), RANK, and osteoprotegerin 
(OPG) mRNA in a mouse type II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model by in situ 
hybridization. The results indicated that most of the TRAP-positive mono- and 
multinucleated cells in the inflamed and proliferating synovium and in the 
pannus were RANK-positive authentic osteoclasts and their precursors. In the 
inflamed synovium and pannus of the mouse CIA model, synovial fibroblastic cells 
around these RANK-positive cells were strongly positive for RANKL. Moreover, 
RANKL-positive osteoblasts on the endosteal bone surface, at a distance from the 
affected synovial joints, increased significantly in the mouse CIA model prior 
to periarticular osteopenia and systemic osteoporosis. These data indicated that 
the RANKL-RANK system plays an important role for osteoclastogenesis in both 
local and systemic osteolytic lesions in autoimmune arthritis, and can therefore 
be a good target for therapeutic intervention.
