OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the regulatory potential of genetic loci controlling 
Mycobacterium butyricum adjuvant-induced arthritis (Mbt-AIA) using mono- and 
polycongenic rats.
METHODS: Of 4 quantitative trait loci (QTLs) that regulate Mbt-AIA, F344 alleles 
at 3 of these loci, Aia1, Aia2, and Aia3, are associated with lower arthritis 
severity, whereas F344 alleles at Aia4 are associated with greater arthritis 
severity. In this study, we constructed congenic lines by transferring 1 or more 
of the F344 genomic segments containing Aia1, Aia2, and Aia3 onto the DA genome. 
We comparatively evaluated their responses to Mbt-AIA with the responses of 
parental DA and F344 rats.
RESULTS: Aia1, encompassing the rat major histocompatibility complex, reduced 
arthritis severity in monocongenic rats of both sexes. The arthritis-lowering 
effects of Aia2 and Aia3 were sex-influenced and were therefore observed in only 
males and only females, respectively. Polycongenic rats containing F344 genomic 
regions at Aia1, Aia2, and Aia3 developed Mbt-AIA of relatively greater severity 
than did F344 rats, implying that in DA and F344 rats, there could be other 
Mbt-AIA loci in addition to Aia1, Aia2, Aia3, and Aia4. To test the possibility 
that some of these Mbt-AIA-regulatory loci may colocalize with other arthritis 
QTLs, we evaluated Mbt-AIA in DA.F344 monocongenic rats containing 
collagen-induced arthritis QTLs. Cia5 (the QTL region on chromosome 10), but not 
Cia5a, Cia4, or Cia6, also regulated Mbt-AIA, and was named Aia5.
CONCLUSION: F344 genomic regions at Aia1, Aia2, and Aia3 and the newly 
identified Aia5 contain genes that reduce Mbt-AIA severity in DA rats. These 
Mbt-AIA-regulatory loci overlap rheumatoid arthritis-susceptibility loci in 
humans.
