IL-6 is a multifunctional cytokine produced by lymphoid and nonlymphoid cells; 
it regulates immune responses, acute-phase reactions, and inflammation. IL-6 
signaling is mediated exclusively by the common signal-transducing component 
gp130, which is also essential for signal transduction of other cytokines of the 
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)/IL-6 family. M Ernst and colleagues generated 
and studied knock-in mice (gp130DeltaSTAT/DeltaSTAT), in which all STAT-binding 
sites (sites binding signal transducers and activators of transcription) were 
deleted from their gene encoding gp130 but binding sites for both Janus kinases 
(JAKs) and for the protein tyrosine phosphatase-2 (SHP-2) were preserved. They 
found that this mutant mouse displayed a blastocyst implantation defect, 
gastrointestinal ulceration, and, interestingly, severe joint disease with 
representative features of rheumatoid arthritis. Synovial cells from this mouse 
exhibited mitogenic hyper-responsiveness to cytokines of the LIF/IL-6 family, a 
phenomenon that was caused by sustained gp130-mediated SHP-2/Ras/Erk activation 
due to a defect in the induction of SOCS-1 (suppressor of cytokine signaling-1; 
also known as SSI or JAB). This suppressor, induced by STAT signaling, regulates 
cytokine signaling. It is, therefore, conceivable that the disturbance of the 
balanced activation between the STAT and SHP-2/Ras/Erk signal pathways causes 
the joint disease in the gp130DeltaSTAT/DeltaSTAT mouse. These findings may be 
beneficial in the elucidation of the cause and the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis in humans.
