The assembly of inflammatory lesions in rheumatoid arthritis is highly regulated 
and typically leads to the formation of lymphoid follicles with germinal center 
(GC) reactions. We used microdissection of such extranodal follicles to analyze 
the colonizing T cells. Although the repertoire of follicular T cells was 
diverse, a subset of T cell receptor (TCR) sequences was detected in multiple 
independent follicles and not in interfollicular zones, suggesting recognition 
of a common antigen. Unexpectedly, the majority of shared TCR sequences were 
from CD8 T cells that were highly enriched in the synovium and present in low 
numbers in the periphery. To examine their role in extranodal GC reactions, CD8 
T cells were depleted in human synovium-SCID mouse chimeras. Depletion of 
synovial CD8 T cells caused disintegration of the GC-containing follicles. In 
the absence of CD8 T cells, follicular dendritic cells disappeared, production 
of lymphotoxin-alpha1beta2 markedly decreased, and immunoglobulin (Ig) secretion 
ceased. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated that these CD8 T cells 
accumulated at the edge of the mantle zone. Besides their unique localization, 
they were characterized by the production of interferon (IFN)-gamma, lack of the 
pore-forming enzyme perforin, and expression of CD40 ligand. Perifollicular 
IFN-gamma+ CD8 T cells were rare in secondary lymphoid tissues but accounted for 
the majority of IFN-gamma+ cells in synovial infiltrates. We propose that CD8+ T 
cells regulate the structural integrity and functional activity of GCs in 
ectopic lymphoid follicles.
