For a long time the complement cascade has been believed to be the predominant 
pathway to inflammation and tissue destruction in autoimmune diseases such as 
systemic lupus erythematosus. Recently, new evidences show that FcRs may share 
the primacy with complement cascade, playing an equal or greater role in the 
disease process. The generation of specific mouse strains deficient in 
individual components has clarified the different role played by complement and 
Fc receptors in their interaction with ICs, illustrating that complement is 
essential for innate immunity against microbial pathogens, requiring natural 
antibodies to mediate its protective effects, whereas FcyRs have evolved as the 
principal system for coupling antigen-antibody complexes to effector cells and 
initiate the inflammatory cascade. Validation of FcRs as new therapeutic targets 
for autoimmune diseases, in particular for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE), 
has been provided by a large number of studies where the biological action of 
soluble forms of FcyRs or of monoclonal antibodies targeting Fc receptors has 
been assessed. Additional support to the role of FcRs in SLE has been provided 
by data obtained with compounds derived from combinatorial chemistry, such as 
TG19320, a tetrameric tripeptide which interferes with IgG/FcgammaR interaction 
in vitro and prevents glomerulonephritis in vivo in a SLE susceptible mouse 
strain. These findings might open the way to new therapeutic approaches for 
disorders where the role of FcRs has been established, including not only 
autoimmune diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, 
multiple myeloma, but also acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
