Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in DBA/1 and proteoglycan-induced arthritis 
(PGIA) in BALB/c mice are the most frequently used mouse models for studying 
clinical, immunological and genetic factors contributing to rheumatoid 
arthritis. DBA/1 ( H2(q)) mice are susceptible to CIA but resistant to PGIA, 
whereas BALB/c mice ( H2 (d)) are susceptible to PGIA and resistant to CIA. To 
gain insight into the mechanisms of how the major clinical (disease 
susceptibility, severity and onset of arthritis) and immunological traits 
(antigen-specific T- and B-cell responses) are influenced by the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC), we have generated a unique intercross of 
BALB/c and DBA/1 parent strains, and the F1 and F2 hybrids were immunized for 
either CIA or PGIA. The major clinical and immunological traits were identified 
as either binary (qualitative) or quantitative traits on Chromosome 17 with a 
peak at MHC when the entire population was analyzed. In contrast, when only 
arthritic (susceptible) mice were selected and analyzed, the major clinical 
traits (severity and onset) 'lost' the linkage to MHC. Thus, MHC dictates 
disease susceptibility, but not the severity of arthritis. This was even more 
evident in the case of the H2(q) allele, which was clearly responsible for the 
dominant inheritance of arthritis in F2 hybrids (either CIA or PGIA). In 
conclusion, while certain MHC alleles strongly affect disease susceptibility and 
determine the mode of inheritance of a polygenic autoimmune disease, neither the 
type of inheritance (dominant vs recessive) nor other MHC components have 
evident effects upon the clinical symptoms of arthritis.
