AIM: The cellular joint infiltrate in rheumatoid arthritis patients is rich in 
CD4-positive T-helper lymphocytes and macrophages, rendering anti-CD4 monoclonal 
antibodies (mAbs) suitable for specific immunoscintigraphy of human/experimental 
arthritis. Following intravenous injection, however, mAbs are present both in 
the free form and bound to CD4-positive, circulating monocytes and T-cells. 
Thus, the present study aimed at analyzing the relative contribution of the free 
and the cell-bound component to the imaging of inflamed joints in experimental 
adjuvant arthritis (AA).
METHODS: AA rat peritoneal macrophages or lymph node l-cells were incubated in 
vitro with saturating amounts of 99mTc-anti-CD4 mAb (W3/25) and injected i.v. 
into rats with AA.
RESULTS: In vitro release of 99mTc-anti-CD4 mAb from the cells was limited (on 
average 1.57%/h for macrophages and 0.84%/h for T-cells). Following i.v. 
injection, whole body/joint scans and tissue measurements showed only negligible 
accumulation of radioactivity in inflamed ankle joints (tissue: 0.22 and 0.34% 
of the injected activity, respectively), whereas the radioactivity was 
concentrated in liver (tissue: 79% and 71%, respectively), kidney, and urinary 
bladder. Unlike macrophages, however, anti-CD4 mAb-coated T-cells significantly 
accumulated in lymphoid organs, the inflamed synovial membrane of the ankle 
joints, as well as in elbow and knee joints.
CONCLUSION: While the overall contribution of cell-bound mAbs to the imaging of 
arthritic joints with anti-CD4 mAbs is minimal, differential accumulation of 
macrophages and T-cells in lymphoid organs and the inflamed synovial membrane 
indicates preferential migration patterns of these 2 cell populations in 
arthritic rats. Although only validated for 99mTc-anti-CD4 mAbs, extrapolation 
of the results to other anticellular mAbs with similar affinity for their 
antigen may be possible.
