Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the most common chronic autoimmunopathy, clinically 
leading to joint destruction as a consequence of the chronic inflammatory 
processes. The pathogenesis of this disabling disease is not well understood, 
but molecular events leading to tissue inflammation with cartilage and bone 
destruction are now better defined. Therapy with slow-acting, disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), such as low-dose methotrexate, which is generally 
accepted as a standard, leads to a significant amelioration of symptoms but does 
not stop joint destruction. Due to these disappointing treatment options and the 
identification of certain inflammatory mediators as therapeutic targets, novel 
therapeutic agents such as monoclonal antibodies, 
cytokine-receptor/human-immunoglobulin constructs or recombinant human proteins 
have been tested in RA with some success. Clinical trials testing anti-TNF-alpha 
agents, alone or in combination with methotrexate, have convincingly shown the 
feasibility and efficacy of these novel approaches to the therapy of RA. A 
clinical trial testing combination therapy with chimeric (mouse/human) 
anti-TNF-alpha monoclonal antibody infliximab and methotrexate showed, for the 
first time in any RA trial, that there was no median radiological progression in 
the groups given infliximab plus methotrexate over a 12-month observation 
period. Similar encouraging results might arise from trials employing other 
TNF-alpha-directed agents, such as the fully human monoclonal antibody D2E7, the 
p75 TNF-alpha-receptor/Ig construct, etanercept, or others, as discussed in this 
review. Combination partners other than methotrexate will be established as 
suitable cotreatment along with anti-TNF-alpha biologicals. Forthcoming new 
indications for TNF-alpha-targeted therapies are discussed.
