To examine whether synovial cell proliferation is due to angiogenesis, we 
studied the relationship between the inhibition of synovial cell proliferation 
and an angiogenesis inhibitor, TNP-470, in human synovial tissues. Human 
synovial tissues were implanted into the back of SCID mice (SCID-HuAg mice). 
Sixteen mice were divided into two groups of eight mice each: the untreated 
group (vehicle group) and the TNP-470-treated group that received a dose of 10 
mg/kg body weight by subcutaneous injection. The number of blood vessels and 
synovial lining cells clearly increased in the vehicle group, but the number of 
synovial lining cells clearly decreased and the blood vessels were hardly 
detected in the TNP-470 group. Immunohistochemically, cells that stained 
positively for the anti-proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) mAb were 
abundant in synovial lining cells and endothelial cells in synovial tissues. 
Cells that stained positively for the anti-CD34 polyclonal antibody were 
abundant in the endothelial cells in the vehicle group, but these positively 
stained cells were hardly detected in the TNP-470 group. The PCNA positivity 
ratio in the vehicle group was 0.64 +/- 0.019, whereas that in the TNP-470 group 
was 0.199 +/- 0.007. The numbers of cells that stained positively for anti-CD34 
polyclonal antibody were 242 +/- 13.4 in the vehicle group and 153 +/- 6.73 in 
the TNP-470 group per 10 microscopic fields. Cells that stained positively for 
anti-mouse CD31 mAb were mainly localized in the synovial lining, but invaded 
the subsynovial lining layer in human synovial tissues. On the other hand, cells 
that stained positively for anti-human CD31 mAb were mainly localized in the 
subsynovial lining layer. We found that endothelial cell proliferation is 
dependent on angiogenesis based on the result that angiogenesis and synovial 
cell proliferation were inhibited by treatment with TNP-470.
