OBJECTIVE: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is a model of inflammatory arthritis 
with many similarities to rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We previously mapped in 
F(2) offspring of CIA-susceptible DA and CIA-resistant F344 rats, 5 quantitative 
trait loci (QTLs) for which F344 alleles were associated with reduced CIA 
severity. In the present study, we sought to characterize the independent 
arthritis-modulating effects of these 5 QTLs.
METHODS: CIA-regulatory regions were transferred from the F344 genome to the DA 
background or vice versa by repeated backcrossing. The arthritis-modulating 
effects of the transferred alleles were determined by comparing the severity of 
experimentally induced arthritis in congenic rats with that in DA rats.
RESULTS: Congenic lines with either the F344 major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) on the DA background or the DA MHC on the F344 background were resistant 
to CIA, confirming both MHC and non-MHC contributions to the genetic regulation 
of CIA. F344 alleles at the Cia3 and Cia5 regions of chromosomes 4 and 10 
reduced CIA severity relative to that observed in DA rats. F344 Cia4 and Cia6 
regions of chromosomes 7 and 8 failed to significantly alter CIA severity. 
Arthritis-modifying effects of Cia4 and Cia6 were, however, detected in 
pristane-induced and/or Freund's incomplete adjuvant oil-induced arthritis. The 
arthritis-modifying effects of the non-MHC CIA-regulatory loci differed in males 
and females.
CONCLUSION: These congenic lines confirmed the existence and location of genes 
that regulate the severity of experimental arthritis in rats. Mechanisms 
responsible for the sex-specificity of individual arthritis-regulatory loci may 
explain some of the sex differences observed in RA and other autoimmune diseases 
in humans.
