BACKGROUND: The inhibition of tumorangiogenesis may be of importance in the 
additive treatment of various cancers. Leflunomide, a drug which has been 
approved in Germany for the therapy of rheumatoid arthritis, inhibits the 
activity of several growth factors in vitro. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the effects of the drug on tumor angiogenesis in a nude mouse model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 40 nude mice were injected with human colon 
carcinoma cells. Following randomization in 4 groups, therapy started on day 
five. Group 1 was treated daily with orally administered Leflunomide (35 mg/kg) 
dissolved in 1.5% Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC). Group 2 served as a control 
group and received 1 ml CMC orally per day. The animals of group 3 were treated 
daily with 35 mg Leflunomide/kg KG and 500 mg Uridine/kg dissolved in 1 ml Nacl 
0.9% intraperitoneally. The 4th group again served as a control group and 
received only 500 mg Uridine/kg intraperitoneally each day. The main outcome 
criterion was the angiogenesis score (AS). In addition, the tumor volume and 
tumor weight were also assessed. The AS was determined by immunohistochemistry 
using an antibody against factor VIII related antigen.
RESULTS: All animals tolerated the procedure well. In the Leflunomide and the 
Leflunomide/Uridine group the angiogenesis score (p < 0.01), the tumor volume (p 
< 0.01) and the tumor weight (p < 0.01) were lower compared to the respective 
control groups.
CONCLUSION: The administration of Leflunomide leads to a significant reduction 
of tumor weight and tumor volume following subcutaneous injection of human colon 
carcinoma cells in a nude mouse model. This could be due to the reduction of 
tumor angiogenesis. Following further experimental and clinical studies, 
Leflunomide may come to play a role in the additive treatment of colonic 
carcinoma.
