OBJECTIVE: The relationship between rheumatoid arthritis and atherosclerosis has 
been recognized for >20 years. This study aimed to elucidate the roles of 
oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL; one of the main pathogenic factors of 
atherosclerosis) and its endothelial receptor, lectin-like ox-LDL receptor 1 
(LOX-1), in arthritic joints using a rat zymosan-induced arthritis (ZIA) model.
METHODS: LOX-1 expression and ox-LDL accumulation in arthritic joints were 
detected by immunohistochemistry using specific mouse anti-LOX-1 and anti-ox-LDL 
monoclonal antibodies, respectively. To elucidate the effects of the expressed 
LOX-1 on arthritis, ZIA rats were treated with anti-LOX-1 antibody or normal 
mouse IgG. The severity of arthritis was analyzed by joint swelling. Cell 
infiltration, synovial hyperplasia, and proteoglycan losses were also determined 
by histologic scoring. Proinflammatory cytokine and nitrite levels in serum and 
joint fluid were also measured.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical study of ZIA demonstrated LOX-1 expression on 
synovial endothelium and postcapillary venules at 6 hours after the induction of 
inflammation, with maximum expression detected at 24 hours. LOX-1 was also 
expressed weakly on both joint cartilage and synovium. Ox-LDL, a ligand of 
LOX-1, was also detected in articular chondrocytes. Administration of anti-LOX-1 
antibody, which blocks LOX-1 activity, suppressed joint swelling (by 33.5%), 
leukocyte infiltration, and joint nitrite accumulation at 24 hours, as well as 
cartilage destruction at 7 days, compared with control rats.
CONCLUSION: LOX-1 induction in arthritic joints might play a role in promoting 
joint inflammation and cartilage destruction by mediating leukocyte infiltration 
into the arthritic joints of ZIA rats.
