Most of the data accumulated through studies on natural catalytic autoantibodies 
indicate that production scales up markedly in pathological abnormalities. We 
have previously described an increased level of DNA-hydrolyzing autoantibodies 
in the sera of patients with various autoimmune disorders [systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma], HIV infection and 
lymphoproliferative diseases accompanied by autoimmune manifestations. In the 
present study, we show that an increased level of catalytic activity of 
autoantibodies can be observed in the sera of autoimmune mice, thus providing a 
fundamental insight into the medical relevance of abzymes. Polyclonal 
autoantibodies purified from sera of NZB/W, MRL-lpr/lpr and SJL/J mice show 
proteolytic and DNA-hydrolyzing activities, as opposed to those harvested from 
non-autoimmune BALB/c mice. The expressiveness of the catalytic activity was 
strongly dependent on the age of the animal. The highest levels of catalytic 
activity were found in the sera of mice aged between 8 and 12 months; the lowest 
level was typical of younger animals whose age ranged from 6 to 8 weeks. 
Specific inhibition assays of the catalytic activities were performed to throw 
light on the nature of the abzyme activity. Within a cohort of aging animals, a 
strong correlation between marked autoimmune abnormalities and levels of 
catalytic activities has been established. Nonimmunized SJL/J mice revealed 
specific immune responses to myelin basic protein (MBP), skeletal muscle myosin 
(skMyo) and cardiac myosin (Myo), and highly purified antibodies from their 
serum show specific proteolytic attack against the target antigens. This finding 
prompted us to undertake a more detailed study of specific antibody-mediated 
proteolysis in diseased humans. A targeted catalytic response was originally 
demonstrated against MBP and Myo in multiple sclerosis and myocarditis patients, 
respectively.
