BACKGROUND AND AIM: Circulating autoantibodies are diagnostic markers for a 
variety of autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, 
Sj√∂gren's syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and autoimmune hepatitis. 
Since only view studies exist on individuals without known diseases, we analyzed 
the prevalence of frequently determined autoantibodies in "healthy" individuals.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 111 individuals (43 female, 68 male; mean age 58 +/- 13 
years, median 58, range 22-89), in whom either known or actual clinical evidence 
for autoimmune or internal disease was found, were included. Antinuclear and 
anti-smooth muscle antibodies (ANA and ASMA, respectively) were detected by 
immunofluorescence on rat organ sections and Hep 2 cells. Antibodies to 
liver-kidney-microsomes-1 (anti-LKM-1) and antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) 
were detected and semiquantified by immunofluorescence. Additionally, anti-LKM-1 
and AMA were determined by ELISA and Western blot. Antibodies against soluble 
liver antigens (anti-SLA) were quantified by ELISA. Sera with a titer of 1 : 40 
or higher were classified as positive.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Sera of "healthy" adults displayed high frequencies of 
ANA and ASMA (28/111, 25%, and 48/111, 43%, respectively). Although no sex 
differences were found for ASMA, sera of healthy women tested more often 
positive for ANA (p < 0.01). Since at least one in three or four healthy 
individuals tested positive for ANA or ASMA, the positive predictive value of 
these autoantibodies is low, and clinical interpretation should include 
additional information.
