Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis 
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Blockage of TNFalpha actions by systemic 
administration of TNF antagonists has recently been shown to ameliorate joint 
symptoms in RA patients. In the present study, a streptococcal cell wall 
(SCW)-induced rat arthritis model was used to evaluate the effect of different 
gene transfer routes of a TNF antagonist on the development and severity of 
arthritis. Successful delivery of a plasmid DNA encoding a rat TNF 
receptor-immunoglobulin Fc (TNFR:Fc) fusion gene prompted the subsequent 
administration of a recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vector encoding 
the antagonist, either locally (intraarticular) or systemically (intramuscular). 
The TNFR:Fc gene, delivered by either route, resulted in profound suppression of 
the arthritis as reflected in decreased inflammatory cell infiltration, pannus 
formation, cartilage and bone destruction, and mRNA expression of joint 
proinflammatory cytokines. Increased bioactive serum TNFR levels were detected 
as a result of rAAV-ratTNFR:Fc administration, concomitant with a decrease in 
circulating TNFalpha. Administration of the rAAV-ratTNFR:Fc vector to one joint 
also suppressed arthritis in the contralateral joint. Importantly, 
intraarticular administration resulted in significantly lower systemic 
distribution of the gene product. Hence, the use of rAAV as the delivery vector 
for TNFR:Fc effectively suppressed SCW-induced arthritis and may provide an 
approach for local delivery of antiarthritic therapy.
