Autoantibodies capable of binding the immunoregulatory neuropeptide vasoactive 
intestinal peptide (VIP) were detected in the sera of a mouse strain prone to 
autoimmune disease due to the lpr mutation (MRL/lpr). The autoantibodies were 
not present in control wildtype MRL/lpr mice, but they were readily detected in 
humans without autoimmune disease. The binding was due to low affinity VIP 
recognition. Increased VIP binding activity was evident in patients with 
systemic lupus erythematosus but not systemic sclerosis, Sj√∂gren's syndrome 
(SS), rheumatoid arthritis or autoimmune thyroiditis. Recombinant VIP binding Fv 
clones (fragment variable; the variable domains of the light and heavy chains 
antibody subunits joined with a peptide linker) were isolated from a phage 
display library prepared from lupus patients. One Fv clone displaying 
VIP-selective binding and several clones displaying cross-reactivity with 
unrelated peptides were identified. Replacement mutations in the VIP-selective 
clone were preferentially localized in the regions known to make contacts with 
the antigen, i.e. the complementarity determining regions, suggesting that the 
selective binding activity is due to immunological maturation of the antibodies. 
Frequent occurrences of autoantibody responses to VIP indicate that 
immunological tolerance to this neuropeptide can be readily broken. The 
depletion of VIP by specific antibodies in autoimmune disease may interfere with 
VIP regulation of T cells and inflammatory cells and result in further 
amplification of autoreactive immunological responses.
