OBJECTIVE: DA rats are highly susceptible to experimental models of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Linkage analyses in different models have identified several 
quantitative trait loci (QTLs) within a 70-cM region of DA rat chromosome 4 
(C4). We produced congenic strains for these QTLs in order to map and 
characterize their impact on arthritis development.
METHODS: Selective breeding was used to transfer C4 intervals from 
arthritis-resistant PVG.1AV1 rats onto DA rats. These congenic strains were 
evaluated for susceptibility to arthritis induced by intradermal injection of 
rat type II collagen, pristane (a well-defined synthetic adjuvant oil), 
mycobacteria, or squalene (an endogenous adjuvant oil used in human vaccine).
RESULTS: Rats congenic for PVG.1AV1 genes in the 70-cM region were less 
susceptible than DA rats to collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), pristane-induced 
arthritis, adjuvant-induced arthritis, and squalene-induced arthritis (SIA). 
Experiments in subcongenic strains indicated a gene regulating arthritis in 
males located in a 20-cM interval overlapping the QTL Pia5. A second gene, 
located in a 10-cM interval harboring the QTL Oia2, attenuated SIA and CIA. The 
latter caused a change in anticollagen antibody isotype levels toward a pattern 
similar to that seen in PVG.1AV1 rats.
CONCLUSION: The QTL Oia2 regulates arthritis induced both by the nonimmunogenic 
immunostimulant squalene and by cartilage collagen. In CIA, it also skews 
anticollagen isotype profiles, suggesting qualitative regulation of 
autoimmunity. Interestingly, the homologous human chromosome region 12p12-p13 
has also been linked to RA, suggesting that genetic and functional dissection of 
this locus will provide clues to disease pathways that lead to joint 
inflammation.
