OBJECTIVE: Pleiotrophin (PTN), a 15.3-kd heparin-binding peptide, is expressed 
in mesodermal and neuroectodermal cells during development, but rarely in adult 
tissues. Since developmentally regulated factors often reappear during disease, 
we sought to determine whether there was PTN expression in the synovial 
membranes of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: PTN messenger RNA expression was assayed by quantitative reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. The protein was localized by 
immunohistochemistry and quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA). Effects of PTN on cell proliferation in vitro were determined by DNA 
measurements.
RESULTS: PTN expression in normal adult synovial membranes and cartilage was 
barely detectable. However, PTN was strongly up-regulated in synovial tissues 
from patients with RA. In contrast, samples from patients with pyogenic 
arthritis had moderate PTN levels, and those from patients with osteoarthritis 
had only a slight increase in PTN, as measured by ELISA. In RA patients, PTN was 
localized primarily in synoviocytes but was also found in endothelial cells of 
blood vessels. In cultured mouse fibroblasts used as a model, PTN expression was 
up-regulated by tumor necrosis factor alpha and was more weakly up-regulated by 
epidermal growth factor. Recombinant PTN stimulated the proliferation of 
cultured human synoviocytes and the monocyte cell line THP-1, but not human 
dermal fibroblasts, in which PTN increased the synthesis of vascular endothelial 
growth factor.
CONCLUSION: In addition to certain types of cancer, the embryonic growth and 
differentiation factor PTN is expressed in adults with inflammatory diseases, in 
particular, RA. Proinflammatory cytokines enhance the expression of PTN. Thus, 
we propose that PTN is a further paracrine angiogenesis and growth factor for 
synovial cells in RA.
