OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of bizhongxiao (BZX) decoction on the 
expression of VEGF in the synovial membrane of C II-induced arthritis(CIA) in 
rats and to explore the mechanism of BZX decoction in the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis RA.
METHODS: Seventy-five SD rats were randomly divided into four groups. The rat 
experimental arthritis model was established by subcutaneous injection of II 
collogen. The expression of VEGF was detected with immunohistochemistry in 
different times.
RESULTS: The incidence of arthritis in the rats immunized with C II was 
approximately 88.57%. The arthritis index of the model group was rising, but 
that of the BZX decoction group and the methotrexate (MTX) group were decreasing 
on the 30th day. No expression of VEGF was found in the synovial membrane of the 
normal group. The expression of VEGF of the model group was notably higher than 
that of the BZX decoction group and the MTX group in different times (P < 0.01). 
The expression of VEGF of the model group rose step by step, but that of the BZX 
decoction group and the MTX group decreased and was significantly lower than 
that of the model group (P < 0.01). The expression of VEGF of the BZX decoction 
group was significantly lower than that of the MTX group(P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The expression of VEGF is relative to the synovial pannus formation 
in RA. BZX decoction and MTX could decrease the expression of VEGF, but the 
curative effect of BZX decoction is significantly better than that of MTX. BZX 
decoction could inhibit the formation of the synovial pannus or bone in RA by 
decreasing the expression of VEGF.
