OBJECTIVE: PG201 has been formulated using 12 herbs known to have 
anti-inflammatory and protective effects on damaged tissue and bone among other 
functions. The present study was done in order to assess the therapeutic effects 
of PG201 in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in mice.
METHODS: DBA/1 mice were immunized with bovine type II collagen. After a second 
collagen immunization, mice were treated with PG201 orally at 10 mg/kg once a 
day for 18 days. Paws were evaluated macroscopically for redness, swelling and 
deformities. The levels of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta in the ankle were examined. 
The severity of arthritis within the knee joints was evaluated by histological 
assessment of cartilage destruction and pannus formation. Molecular indicators 
related to CIA pathology were analysed by measuring the serum levels of matrix 
metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2), tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase 2 
(TIMP-2) and the anti-inflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-10.
RESULTS: Administration of PG201 significantly suppressed the progression of CIA 
and inhibited the production of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta in the paws. The erosion 
of cartilage was dramatically reduced in mouse knees after treatment with PG201. 
In the serum of PG201-treated mice, the level of TIMP-2 and the ratio of TIMP-2 
to MMP-2 were significantly elevated, and the level of IL-4, but not of IL-10, 
was increased.
CONCLUSION: Administration of PG201 has therapeutic effects on CIA. Protection 
of cartilage was particularly prominent. PG201 is a potential therapy for 
rheumatoid arthritis.
