OBJECTIVE: To analyse the prevalence and clinical significance of anti-cyclic 
citrullinated peptide antibodies (anti-CCP) and antikeratin antibodies (AKA) in 
patients with palindromic rheumatism (PR).
METHOD: Sixty-three patients with PR were included: 33 were defined as pure or 
persistent PR at the time of serum test measurement, and 30 as associated PR, 
defined as patients with past history of PR who had developed persistent 
arthritis at the time of serum test: [21 with rheumatoid arthritis (RA)]. Sixty 
patients with early RA, and 80 with seronegative spondyloarthropathy were 
included as control groups. Anti-CCP were determined by a standardized ELISA 
test and AKA by indirect immunofluorescence in rat oesophagus. Clinical 
characteristics of these pure PR patients were compared according to the 
presence or absence of anti-CCP antibodies. A follow-up study was also 
performed.
RESULTS: Anti-CCP were detected in 18 out of 32 (56.3%) patients with pure PR 
and 10 out of 30 (33.3%) with associated PR (38.1% in RA-associated PR 
patients). AKA were detected in 12 patients out of 33, with pure PR (36.4%), and 
in 9 out of 30 with associated PR (30%) (33.3% in RA-associated PR patients). 
The prevalence of anti-CCP and AKA in the RA control group was 55% (not 
significantly different from the pure PR group) and 61.7% (with respect to pure 
PR patients, P=0.02), respectively. In the spondyloarthropathy group, the 
prevalence of anti-CCP and AKA was 2.5 and 3.8%, respectively (P<0.001 compared 
with pure PR patients). No significant clinical differences were observed 
between pure PR patients with and without CCP antibodies.
CONCLUSIONS: Anti-CCP and, to a lesser extent, AKA, were found in a high 
proportion of patients with PR, suggesting that this syndrome is an abortive 
form of RA. The predictive value of these antibodies in PR, as markers of 
progression to an established RA, remains uncertain.
