Na√Øve T cells, when activated by specific antigen and cytokines, up-regulate 
adhesion molecules as well as chemokine receptors on their surface, which allows 
them to migrate to inflamed tissues. Human studies have shown that CXCR3 is one 
of the chemokine receptors that is induced during T cell activation. Moreover, 
CXCR3-positive T cells are enriched at inflammatory sites in patients with 
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. In this 
study, we use a mouse model of inflammation to demonstrate that CXCR3 is 
required for activated T cell transmigration to inflamed tissue. Using an anti- 
mCXCR3 antibody, we have shown that in vitro-differentiated T helper (Th) 1 and 
Th2 cells up-regulated CXCR3 upon stimulation with specific antigen/major 
histocompatibility complex. However, only Th1 cells, when adoptively transferred 
to syngeneic recipients, are efficiently recruited to the peritoneum in an 
adjuvant-induced peritonitis model. Furthermore, the neutralizing anti-mCXCR3 
antibody profoundly inhibits the recruitment of Th1 cells to the inflamed 
peritoneum. Real-time, quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction analysis demonstrates that the CXCR3 ligands, interferon 
(IFN)-inducible protein 10 (CXCL10) and IFN-inducible T cell alpha 
chemoattractant (CXCL11), are among the many chemokines induced in the 
adjuvant-treated peritoneum. The anti-mCXCR3 antibody is also effective in 
inhibiting a delayed-type hypersensitivity response, which is largely mediated 
by enhanced trafficking of activated T cells to peripheral inflammatory sites. 
Collectively, our results suggest that CXCR3 has a critical role in T cell 
transmigration to sites of inflammation and thus, may serve as a molecular 
target for anti-inflammatory therapies.
