OBJECTIVE: Incadronate is a third-generation bisphosphonate that suppresses bone 
resorption and is used to treat skeletal disorders and prevent bone loss in 
pathological conditions. We evaluated its therapeutic potential and 
antiinflammatory effects in established adjuvant induced arthritis (AIA), a rat 
model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Rats were administered incadronate subcutaneously at a dose of either 
0.1 or 1.0 mg/kg/day, or 0.1 or 1.0 mg/kg/week, while a positive control group 
received phosphate buffered saline alone from Day 14 (after the onset of 
arthritis) to Day 42. The destruction of bone and cartilage and the 
antiinflammatory effects of incadronate in rats with established AIA were 
assessed during treatment, with reference to the arthritis index, hind paw 
volume, and radiological and histological examinations. To establish whether 
incadronate affects the migration of inflammatory cells, a chemotaxis assay was 
carried out using macrophage-like RAW 264.7 cells. Results. In vivo, incadronate 
suppressed the clinical manifestations of AIA in a dose-dependent manner. In 
vitro, the various concentrations of incadronate suppressed the migration of 
macrophages, but the viability and adhesion of these cells were not suppressed.
CONCLUSION: Incadronate not only inhibits bone destruction but also reduces 
cartilage degeneration and joint inflammation in rats with established AIA. The 
mechanism underlying these antiinflammatory actions of incadronate may be 
attributable to the inhibition of macrophage migration to the site of 
inflammation. Bisphosphonates might be effective in preventing the progressive 
joint destruction and inflammation seen in patients with RA.
