The inducible NO synthase gene (iNOS) plays a role in a number of chronic and 
acute conditions, including septic shock and contact hypersensitivity autoimmune 
diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, gastrointestinal disorders, and 
myocardial ischemia. The iNOS gene is primarily under transcriptional control 
and is induced in a variety of conditions. The ability to monitor and quantify 
iNOS expression in vivo may facilitate a better understanding of the role of 
iNOS in different diseases. In this study, we describe a transgenic mouse 
(iNos-luc) in which the luciferase reporter is under control of the murine iNOS 
promoter. In an acute sepsis model produced by injection of IFN-gamma and LPS, 
we observed an induction of iNOS-driven luciferase activity in the mouse liver. 
This transgene induction is dose and time dependent and correlated with an 
increase of liver iNOS protein and iNOS mRNA levels. With this model, we tested 
11 compounds previously shown to inhibit iNOS induction in vitro or in vivo. 
Administration of dexamethasone, epigallocatechin gallate, 
alpha-phenyl-N-tert-butyl nitrone, and ebselen significantly suppressed iNOS 
transgene induction by IFN-gamma and LPS. We further evaluated the use of the 
iNos-luc transgenic mice in a zymosan-induced arthritis model. Intra-articular 
injection of zymosan induced iNos-luc expression in the knee joint. The 
establishment of the iNos-luc transgenic model provides a valuable tool for 
studying processes in which the iNOS gene is induced and for screening 
anti-inflammatory compounds in vivo.
