OBJECTIVE: To clarify the pharmacological action of an anti-rheumatic agent 
T-614, we investigated its effects on immunoglobulin (Ig) production by cultured 
B cells and Ig secretion from synovial tissues of patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) using SCID mice engrafted with human RA tissue (SCID-HuRAg).
METHODS: Murine B cells were prepared from mouse spleen by a T-cell depletion 
method. The cells were cultured with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and/or interleukin 
4 (IL-4) in the absence or presence of T-614. Human B cells were isolated from 
peripheral blood of healthy donors and the Ig production was induced by 
co-culture with autologous T cells and anti-CD3 antibody. SCID-HuRAg was 
prepared according to our previous method. T-614 was orally administered to the 
mice once daily for 4 weeks starting on the fourth week after the implantation. 
Then, peripheral blood was obtained and the implanted tissues were removed. Igs 
in the culture media or the sera were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: In murine B-cell cultures, T-614 significantly decreased not only the 
IgM production stimulated with LPS but IgG1 production induced by LPS and IL-4. 
Regarding human B cells stimulated with T cells, it also inhibited IgM and IgG 
production. In SCID-HuRAg mice, high concentrations of polyclonal human IgG were 
detectable in the sera of all mice. A significant decrease in the IgG level was 
observed in the T-614-treated group compared with the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed that T-614 inhibited Ig production by the cultured B 
cells and also decreased the high level of human IgG observed in SCID-HuRAg 
mice. These results may support its effect on plasma Ig in RA patients and 
provide insights into the mechanisms of its anti-rheumatic effect.
