1. FK506 and cyclosporin A (CsA) are immunosuppressive drugs, that specifically 
inhibit T-cell activation via calcineurin inhibition. This study was undertaken 
to investigate whether calcineurin inhibitors exert analgesic actions in rat 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA), an animal model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 
2. AIA was induced in female Lewis rats. Single doses of FK506 and CsA were 
orally administered to arthritic rats 17 days after arthritis induction. 
Intensity of hyperalgesia was assessed by measuring the pain threshold of hind 
paws. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, IL-1beta and PGE(2) levels in paw 
extracts were determined by ELISA. TNF activity was measured by L929 cell 
cytotoxicity assay. IL-1beta and cyclooxygenase (COX) mRNA expression in 
arthritic paws were measured by RT-PCR. 3. Single doses of FK506 and CsA 
markedly reduced joint hyperalgesia 24 h after drug administration, without 
affecting inflammation in an advanced stage of AIA. 4. The calcineurin 
inhibitors partially reduced the elevated level of TNF-alpha in arthritic paws, 
however, the analgesic effects of these drugs were not associated with the 
reduction in TNF-alpha level. 5. Moreover, treatment with anti-rat TNF-alpha 
antibody did not affect the hyperalgesia, when TNF-alpha activity was suppressed 
in arthritic paws by that treatment. 6. Both calcineurin inhibitors reduced the 
elevated level of IL-1beta in arthritic paws to a normal level, 24 h after drug 
administration. 7. FK506 reduced IL-1beta and COX-2 mRNA expression and PGE(2) 
level in arthritic paws. 8 In conclusion, calcineurin inhibitors rapidly reduce 
joint hyperalgesia probably by downregulating IL-1beta, but not TNF-alpha, in 
AIA. Our findings may provide a new strategy for the treatment of pain in RA.
