OBJECTIVE: To study the capacity of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) 
to regulate proliferation, apoptosis, and p53 in an animal model of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) from humans with RA.
METHODS: Antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) was induced in MIF(-/-) mice and 
littermate controls. FLS were obtained from patients with RA. Western blotting 
and immunohistochemistry were used to measure p53 in cells and tissues. 
Apoptosis was detected in cells by flow cytometry using TUNEL and annexin 
V/propidium iodide labeling. Apoptosis in tissue was detected using TUNEL. 
Proliferation was assessed in cultured cells and tissue by (3)H-thymidine 
incorporation and Ki-67 immunostaining, respectively.
RESULTS: MIF inhibited p53 expression in human RA FLS. Levels of p53 were 
correspondingly increased in MIF(-/-) mouse tissues and cells. Spontaneous and 
sodium nitroprusside-induced apoptosis were significantly increased in MIF(-/-) 
cells. In vitro exposure of FLS to MIF reduced apoptosis and significantly 
induced FLS proliferation. Synoviocyte proliferation in MIF(-/-) mice was 
correspondingly reduced. A decrease in the severity of AIA in MIF(-/-) mice was 
associated with an increase in p53 and apoptosis in synovium. Evidence of in 
situ proliferation was scant in this model, and no difference in in situ 
proliferation was detectable in MIF(-/-) mice compared with wild-type mice.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate a role for MIF in the regulation of p53 
expression and p53-mediated events in the inflamed synovium and support the 
hypothesis that MIF is of critical importance in the pathogenesis of RA.
