The inflammation that occurs during rheumatoid arthritis or atherosclerosis is 
characterized by the release of large amounts of sPLA(2) (group IIA secretory 
phospholipase A(2)). We have shown previously that the sPLA(2) promoter in SMC 
(smooth-muscle cells) is activated by interleukin-1beta and cAMP-signalling 
pathways, through the interplay of multiple transcription factors [Antonio, 
Brouillet, Janvier, Monne, Bereziat, Andreani, and Raymondjean (2002) Biochem. 
J. 368, 415-424]. In the present study, we have investigated the regulation of 
sPLA(2) gene expression in rat aortic SMCs by oxysterols. We found that 
oxysterol ligands that bind to the LXR (liver X receptor), including 25-HC 
(25-hydroxycholesterol) and 22( R )-HC, cause the accumulation of sPLA(2) mRNA 
and an increased enzyme activity. Transient transfection experiments 
demonstrated that the sPLA(2) promoter is synergistically activated by 22( R 
)-HC in combination with 9- cis -retinoic acid, a ligand for the LXR 
heterodimeric partner RXR (retinoid X receptor). Promoter activity was also 
increased in a sterol-responsive fashion when cells were co-transfected with 
LXRalpha/RXRalpha or LXRbeta/RXRalpha. Mutagenesis studies and gel 
mobility-shift assays revealed that LXR/RXR heterodimers regulate sPLA(2) 
transcription directly, by interacting with a degenerated LXRE (LXR response 
element) at position [-421/-406] of the sPLA(2) promoter. Chromatin 
immunoprecipitation revealed the in vivo occupancy of LXR on the sPLA(2) 
promoter. In addition, the orphan nuclear receptor LRH-1 (liver receptor 
homologue-1) potentiated the sterol-dependent regulation of the sPLA(2) promoter 
by binding to an identified promoter element (TCAAGGCTG). Finally, we have 
demonstrated that oxysterols act independent of interleukin-1beta and cAMP 
pathways to activate the sPLA(2) promoter. In the present study, we have 
identified a new pathway activating sPLA(2) gene expression in SMCs.
