To identify the regulatory effect of sodium selenite and vitamin E on the 
complement-neutrophil-reactive oxygen(ROS) activation feedback (CNAF) mechanism 
mediated inflammatory response, we detected ROS production and complement 
activation in vitro tests by chemiluminescence technique and complement fixation 
and recognized the regulation of the inflammatory response in vivo mouse 
vasculitis models of skin, lung, and liver. Convincing results were observed as 
both in vitro and in vivo experiments showing inhibition of CNAF mechanism with 
sodium selenite and vitamin E could effect the reduced ROS production and 
complement activation. The incidence (100%) for vasculitis in control group 
decreased to 20%-57% in sodium selenite and vitamin E treated groups. 
Elucidation of the ancillary mechanism of CNAF enhancing inflammatory response 
is a promising area for new therapeutic developments in the modulation of 
inflammatory response. As in a clinical approach, a remarkable therapeutic 
effect with sodium selenite was observed during an epidemic episode of epidemic 
hemorrhagic fever in Henan province. The mortality rate of fulminant cases was 
reduced from 100% of untreated control cases to 36.6% by treatment with sodium 
selenite. The results of present studies strongly suggest that antioxidants such 
as selenium and vitamin E as well as others like flavonoids can exhibit a novel 
anti-inflammatory action via this CNAF mechanism. It is expected in the future 
an increasing number of patients with severe infections or inflammatory 
disorders in which excessive complement activation and adverse ROS production 
have been implicated, e. g. ischemia-reperfusion injury, severe sepsis and 
diverse inflammatory vascular injuries like rheumatoid arthritis, hepatitis and 
inflammatory bowel diseases should benefit from this newer concept guided 
adjuvant therapies which make use of nutrient antioxidants like selenium, 
vitamin E and others.
