In 1996 a new murine model of spontaneous arthritis was described by the group 
of Benoist and Mathis. Mice transgenic for a T cell receptor recognizing an 
epitope of bovine RNase and bred onto a NOD background developed severe 
destructive arthritis, which resembles human rheumatoid arthritis in many 
respects. The development of disease requires the presence of T and B 
lymphocytes and is dependent on the MHC class II molecule I-A(g7). B cell 
activation by antigen and an additional CD40-CD40 ligand interaction was found 
to give rise to the production of autoantibodies. Glucose-6-phosphate isomerase 
was identified as the target of the autoantibodies; moreover, the transgenic T 
cells were demonstrated to exhibit a dual specificity for both bovine RNase and 
glucose-6-phosphate isomerase. Importantly, the arthritis is serum transferable 
to normal recipients, enabling the examination of the pathogenic mechanisms of 
joint inflammation and destruction. Recent studies suggest the crucial 
involvement of the innate immune system in the development of antibody-induced 
arthritis. Complement components, Fc receptors and neutrophils are indispensable 
for disease induction. An overview of the existing data is given and the 
emerging concepts of the pathogenesis of the K/BxN arthritis are discussed with 
respect to their relevance for human rheumatoid arthritis. Because of the 
reliable and robust induction of joint inflammation by serum transfer this new 
disease model has been and will be a valuable means to address the 
as-yet-unanswered key questions related to the development of arthritis.
