The ongoing evaluation of the cytokine-cascade and the steadily growing 
knowledge about cytokine mediated processes seem to open striking therapeutical 
options in the fields of sepsis, autoimmune and chronic inflammatory joint or 
bowel diseases via modulation or inhibition of the cytokine-cascade. There is no 
doubt about the efficacy of the various anticytokine-treatments in the therapy 
of chronic inflammatory rheumatic diseases. A large number of preclinical and 
clinical studies forms the scientific basis for these almost widely established 
therapies. These so-called "biologicals" are fully accepted as disease modifying 
antirheumatic drugs, equal to or even more potent than the classical substances. 
On the one hand, these agents are acting as tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha-blockers, like a chimeric (human/mouse) monoclonal 
anti-tumor-necrosis-factor-alpha-antibody (Infliximab), a recombinant soluble 
tumor necrosis factor-receptor p75 fusion protein (Etanercept), and a fully 
humanized anti-tumor-necrosis-factor-alpha-antibody (Adalimumab); on the other 
hand a recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (Anakinra) is used in 
clinical practice. Generally these drugs are very well tolerated; the most 
common adverse events are higher infection rates (including tuberculosis) and 
injection-site reactions for the subcutaneously administered agents. Of course 
one should be aware of the possibly elevated risk for malignancies although 
there is no evidence for that so far, but the observation time since launching 
of these drugs is considerably short. To conclude, involved physicians should 
use these new "tools" very carefully and critically, because long-term tolerance 
and safety is a matter of ongoing investigation and last but not least because 
of the growing importance of cost effectiveness when using such expensive 
medications. Above all initiation and monitoring of those therapies should be 
restricted to rheumatologists
