To explore the role of nitric oxide (NO) in the pathogenesis and effect on 
regulation of iron metabolism in anemia of chronic disease (ACD) and provide 
experimental evidence for prevention and treatment of ACD. On the basis of 
traditional animal model of rheumatoid arthritis, an ACD rat model was 
established by repeated injection of Freund's complete adjuvant. The 
relationship between NO concentration and iron metabolism was observed in ACD 
rats with and without NO synthase inhibitor, L-NAME, (N omega-nitro-L-arginine 
methyl ester L-NAME). The results showed that anemia was induced in the rat 
model. In the ACD group, NO concentration and NO synthase activity in serum 
increased; iron, total iron binding capacity (TIBC) and transferrin saturation 
(TS) in serum and ferritin in erythrocytes (rFn) decreased; transferrin receptor 
(TfR) and iron in bone marrow cells decreased; ferritin in serum and iron in 
liver increased and meanwhile the acotinase activity in liver decreased. After 
administration of L-NAME, anemia was improved, when NO, NO-synthase activity, 
liver iron and serum ferritin decreased, but serum iron, TS, TIBC, rFn, TfR, 
iron in marrow cells and liver acotinase activity elevated. The levels of 
parameters for iron metabolism in ACD + L-NAME group were situated between ACD 
and control groups. It is concluded that NO plays an important role in 
pathogenesis of ACD and influences the regulation of iron in ACD. Decrease of NO 
level as early as possible will benefit to block the development of anemia, that 
will provide a new strategy of therapy for ACD.
