Numerous epidemiological studies have pointed out a higher frequency of 
temporomandibular disorder (TMD) in women than in men, which indicates the 
involvement of a sex hormone, such as estrogen, in the pathogenesis of TMD. 
Although estrogen is known to play pivotal roles in osteoarthrosis or rheumatoid 
arthritis in systemic joints, there have been few reports about the role of 
estrogen in the temporomandibular joint (TMJ). The effect of estrogen is 
generally mediated by the estrogen receptors (ERs) ER alpha (the predominant 
type) and ER beta. In this study we examined the expression of ER alpha protein 
and mRNA in the TMJ of adult male rats by immunocytochemistry and in situ 
hybridization histochemistry. Intense ER alpha immunoreactivity was localized in 
the synovial lining cells, stromal cells in the articular disc, and chondrocytes 
in the TMJ. These ER alpha-immunopositive synovial lining cells are 
characteristic of cytoplasmic processes identified with confocal and 
immunoelectron microscopy, which indicates that they are synovial type B cells. 
In situ hybridization histochemistry confirmed intense signals for ER alpha in 
the synovial lining cells and the sublining fibroblasts at mRNA levels. The 
nuclei of chondrocytes showed an intense immunoreaction for ER alpha in the 
maturative and hypertrophic layers of the articular cartilage. In addition to 
the nuclear localization of ER alpha, a weak immunoreaction appeared in the 
cytoplasm of some ER alpha-positive cells. These findings support the hypothesis 
that TMJ tissue-at least in the male rat-has the potential to be an estrogen 
target tissue.
