Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by chronic inflammation of the 
synovial membrane in the joint, which leads to the progressive destruction of 
articular cartilage, ligament and bone. Several cytokines such as tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta), and interleukin 6 (IL-6) 
have been implicated in the pathological mechanisms of synovial tissue 
proliferation, joint destruction and programmed cell death in rheumatoid joint. 
In the Korean traditional medicine, Hominis placenta (HP) as an herbal component 
of herb-acupuncture has been widely used to treat chronic inflammatory diseases 
such as RA. To study the therapeutic effects of HP injection into the ST36 
acupoint (HP herb-acupuncture) on the inflammatory responses of a subchondral 
region of rheumatoid joint, the polyarthritis-induced Sprague-Dawley (SD) rat 
was developed as a rheumatoid arthritis model by the intradermal injection of 
dried cells of Mycobacterium tuberculosis emulsified in squalene to the base of 
tail. After the onset stage (11 d after adjuvant injection) of polyarthritis, a 
fixed volume of HP extract was daily injected to Zusanli (ST36) acupoint on the 
rat's leg for 2 weeks. The body weight, paw volume of the knee joint and 
articular index were exploited as an assessment method addressing arthritic 
symptoms, and the expression profiles of TNF-alpha, IL-1beta and IL-6 at the 
subchondral bone of the joint were analyzed using an immunohistochemistry. After 
the treatment of arthritic rats with HP, the body weights and paw volumes of 
arthritic rats were almost restored to the levels of normal rats whereas the 
evaluation by the articular index was not remarkable. The TNF-alpha, IL-1beta 
and IL-6 positive cells in the immunohistological sections of subchondral bone 
region of the joint significantly decreased in HP-treated (ST36 acupoint) 
arthritic group as compared with those in non-treated or HP-treated 
(non-acupoint) ones, which was coincident with the behavioral studies. In 
conclusion, the HP herb-acupuncture was found to be effective to alleviate the 
arthritic symptoms in adjuvant-induced arthritis rats as regards the body 
weight, joint appearance and the expression profiles of inflammatory cytokines.
