Oral administration of autoantigens is a safe and convenient way to induce 
peripheral T-cell tolerance in autoimmune diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS). 
To increase the efficacy of oral tolerance induction and obviate the need for 
large-scale purification of human myelin proteins, we use genetically modified 
lactobacilli expressing myelin antigens. A panel of recombinant lactobacilli was 
constructed producing myelin proteins and peptides, including human and guinea 
pig myelin basic protein (MBP) and proteolipid protein peptide 139-151 
(PLP(139-151)). In this study we examined whether these Lactobacillus 
recombinants are able to induce oral and intranasal tolerance in an animal model 
for multiple sclerosis, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). Lewis 
rats received soluble cell extracts of Lactobacillus transformants intranasally 
three times prior to induction of EAE. For the induction of oral tolerance, rats 
were fed live transformed lactobacilli for 20 days. Ten days after the first 
oral administration EAE was induced. Intranasal administration of extracts 
containing guinea pig MBP (gpMBP) or MBP(72-85) significantly inhibited EAE in 
Lewis rats. Extracts of control transformants did not reduce EAE. Live 
lactobacilli expressing guinea pig MBP(72-85) fused to the marker enzyme 
beta-glucuronidase (beta-gluc) were also able to significantly reduce disease 
when administered orally. In conclusion, these experiments provide proof of 
principle that lactobacilli expressing myelin antigens reduce EAE after mucosal 
(intranasal and oral) administration. This novel method of mucosal tolerance 
induction by mucosal administration of recombinant lactobacilli expressing 
relevant autoantigens could find applications in autoimmune disease in general, 
such as multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis and uveitis.
