IL-1 molecules are encoded by two distinct genes, IL-1alpha and IL-1beta. Both 
isoforms possess essentially identical activities and potencies, whereas 
IL-1alpha, in contrast to IL-1beta, is known to act as a membrane-associated 
IL-1 (MA-IL-1) and plays an important role in a variety of inflammatory 
situations. The transgenic (Tg) mouse line (Tg1706), which was generated in our 
laboratory, overexpresses human IL-1alpha (hIL-1alpha) and exhibits a severe 
arthritic phenotype characterized by autonomous synovial proliferation with 
subsequent cartilage destruction. Because the transgene encoded Lys(64) to 
Ala(271) of the hIL-1alpha amino acid sequence, Tg mice may overproduce MA-IL-1 
as well as soluble IL-1alpha. The present study investigated whether MA-IL-1 
contributes to synovial proliferation and cartilage destruction in the 
development of arthritis. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that both 
macrophage-like and fibroblast-like synoviocytes constitutively produce MA-IL-1. 
D10 cell proliferation assay revealed MA-IL-1 bioactivity of 
paraformaldehyde-fixed synoviocytes and the further induction of endogenous 
mouse MA-IL-1 via autocrine mechanisms. MA-IL-1 expressed on synoviocytes 
triggered synoviocyte self-proliferation through cell-to-cell (i.e., juxtacrine) 
interactions and also promoted proteoglycan release from the cartilage matrix in 
chondrocyte monolayer culture. Interestingly, the severity of arthritis was 
significantly correlated with MA-IL-1 activity rather than with soluble 
IL-1alpha activity or concentration of serum hIL-1alpha. Moreover, when the 
Tg1706 line was compared with the Tg101 line, which selectively overexpresses 
the 17-kDa mature hIL-1alpha, the severity of arthritis was significantly higher 
in the Tg1706 line than in the Tg101 line. These results suggest that MA-IL-1 
contributes to synoviocyte self-proliferation and subsequent cartilage 
destruction in inflammatory joint disease such as rheumatoid arthritis.
