It has been observed that some non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 
may act through several mechanisms, in addition to central inhibition of 
prostaglandin synthesis. These other mechanisms include the L-arginine-nitric 
oxide (L-arginine-NO) pathway, as well as endogenous opiate and serotonergic 
mechanisms. Some of these mechanisms can explain the efficacy of NSAIDs in 
chronic pain conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis. The present study was 
designed to elucidate the involvement of the above pathways/mechanisms in the 
antinociceptive effect of S-(+)-ketoprofen at supraspinal and spinal levels. 
S-(+)-ketoprofen induced dose-dependent antinociception in the pain-induced 
functional impairment model in the rat. The antinociceptive effect of 
S-(+)-ketoprofen was not altered by i.t. or intracerebroventricula (i.c.v.) 
pre-treatment with L-arginine (29.6 microg/site) and 
L-nitro-arginine-monomethylester (L-NAME) (21.1 microg/site) and neither was the 
effect of S-(+)-ketoprofen modified by the opiate antagonist, naloxone (1 mg/kg, 
s.c.). In marked contrast, both i.c.v. administration of the 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(5-HT)(1)/5-HT(2)/5-HT(7) receptor antagonist, methiothepin (1.5 microg/site), 
and i.t. administration of the 5-HT(3)/5-HT(4) receptor antagonist, tropisetron 
(0.9 microg/site), significantly inhibited the S-(+)-ketoprofen-induced 
antinociceptive effect. These data suggest that the antinociceptive response to 
S-(+)-ketoprofen involves serotoninergic mechanisms via both supraspinal 
5-HT(1)/5-HT(2)/5-HT(7) receptors and 5-HT(3) receptors located at spinal level. 
A role of the L-arginine-NO and opiate systems in S-(+)-ketoprofen-induced 
antinociception in the pain-induced functional impairment model in the rat model 
seems unlikely.
