Celecoxib, the first US FDA-approved selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
inhibitor initially developed for the treatment of adult rheumatoid arthritis 
and osteoarthritis, was reported to reduce the polyp burden in patients with 
familial adenomatous polyposis. This specific COX-2 inhibitor also protects 
against experimentally induced carcinogenesis, but molecular mechanisms 
underlying its chemopreventive activities remain largely unresolved. In the 
present work, we found that celecoxib inhibited 
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA)-induced expression of COX-2 in female 
ICR mouse skin when applied topically 30 min prior to TPA as determined by both 
immunoblot and immunohistochemical analyses. In another study, celecoxib 
attenuated the DNA binding activity of activator protein 1 (AP-1) through 
suppression of c-Jun and c-Fos expression in TPA-treated mouse skin. In 
addition, celecoxib inhibited both the catalytic activity and phosphorylation of 
p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase. In the same animal model, TPA 
treatment resulted in rapid activation via phosphorylation of extracellular 
signal-regulated protein kinase (ERK)1/2 and p38 MAP kinase, which are upstream 
of AP-1 in mouse skin. In order to clarify the roles of p38 and ERK in 
TPA-induced AP-1 activation, we utilized the pharmacologic inhibitors of these 
enzymes. The p38 inhibitor SB203580 blocked TPA-mediated AP-1 activation, while 
the MEK1/2 inhibitor U0126 was not inhibitory despite suppression of c-Fos 
expression in mouse skin. Furthermore, SB203580 markedly inhibited COX-2 
expression induced by TPA. Taken together, these findings suggest that celecoxib 
down-regulates COX-2 by blocking activation of p38 MAP kinase and AP-1, which 
may represent molecular mechanisms underlying antitumor promoting effects of 
this drug on mouse skin tumorigenesis.
