Complement activation plays a relevant role in the development of tissue damage 
under inflammatory conditions, and clinical and experimental observations 
emphasize its contribution to inflammatory vasculitides. Statins have recently 
been shown to reduce cardiovascular morbidity independently of plasma 
cholesterol lowering and in vitro studies support a direct anti-inflammatory 
action of these drugs. The aim of this study was to verify the in vivo effect of 
fluvastatin on complement-mediated acute peritoneal inflammation. The effect of 
oral treatment with fluvastatin was investigated in normo-cholesterolaemic rats 
that received intraperitoneal injection of either yeast-activated rat serum 
(Y-act RS) or lipopolysaccharide to induce peritoneal inflammation monitored by 
the number of PMN recruited in peritoneal fluid washes. In addition, vascular 
adherence and extravasation of leucocytes were evaluated by direct 
videomicroscopy examination on mesentery postcapillary venules topically exposed 
to Y-act RS. The number of PMN in the peritoneal washes of rats treated with 
fluvastatin was 38% lower than that of untreated animals (P < 0.05) 12 h after 
LPS injection, and was even lower (56%) in rats treated with Y-act RS already 8 
h after injection (P < 0.02). Firm adhesion to endothelium and extravasation of 
leucocytes evaluated under direct videomicroscopy observation were significantly 
inhibited in fluvastatin treated rats (77% and 72%, respectively; P < 0.01), 120 
min after treatment with Y-act RS. Our results demonstrate that fluvastatin 
inhibits in vivo complement-dependent acute peritoneal inflammation and suggest 
a role for statins in preventing the inflammatory flares usually associated with 
complement activation in chronic diseases, such as SLE or rheumatoid arthritis.
