Endogenous opioid peptides have an essential role in the intrinsic modulation 
and control of inflammatory pain, which could be therapeutically useful. In this 
study, we established a muscular electroporation method for the gene transfer of 
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) in vivo and investigated its effect on inflammatory 
pain in a rat model of rheumatoid arthritis. The gene encoding human POMC was 
inserted into a modified pCMV plasmid, and 0-200 microg of the plasmid-POMC DNA 
construct was transferred into the tibialis anterior muscle of rats treated with 
complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) with or without POMC gene transfer by the 
electroporation method. The safety and efficiency of the gene transfer was 
assessed with the following parameters: thermal hyperalgesia, serum 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and endorphin levels, paw swelling and muscle 
endorphin levels at 1, 2 and 3 weeks after electroporation. Serum ACTH and 
endorphin levels of the group into which the gene encoding POMC had been 
transferred were increased to about 13-14-fold those of the normal control. 
These levels peaked 1 week after electroporation and significantly decreased 2 
weeks after electroporation. Rats that had received the gene encoding POMC had 
less thermal hypersensitivity and paw swelling than the non-gene-transferred 
group at days 3, 5 and 7 after injection with CFA. Our promising results showed 
that transfer of the gene encoding POMC by electroporation is a new and 
effective method for its expression in vivo, and the analgesic effects of POMC 
cDNA with electroporation in a rat model of rheumatoid arthritis are reversed by 
naloxone.
