Immunization of Lewis rats with heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra 
leads to development of polyarthritis (adjuvant-induced arthritis; AA) that 
shares several features with human rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Immune response to 
the 65-kDa mycobacterial heat-shock protein (Bhsp65) is believed to be involved 
in induction of AA as well as in experimental modulation of this disease. 
However, the understanding of several critical aspects of the pathogenesis of AA 
in the Lewis rat has severely been hampered by the lack of information both 
regarding the level as well as epitope specificity of tolerance to the mammalian 
self (rat) homologue of Bhsp65, 65-kDa rat heat-shock protein (Rhsp65), and 
about the functional attributes of the T cell repertoire specific for this self 
protein. In this study, we established that tolerance to Rhsp65 in the Lewis rat 
is incomplete, and that the residual T cells primed upon challenge with this 
self hsp65 are disease regulating in nature. We also have defined the T cell 
epitopes in the C-terminal region within Rhsp65 that contribute predominantly to 
the immune reactivity as well as the AA-protective effect of this self protein. 
Furthermore, the T cells primed by peptides comprising these C-terminal 
determinants can be efficiently restimulated by the naturally generated epitopes 
from endogenous Rhsp65, suggesting that self hsp65 might also be involved in 
natural remission from acute AA. These novel first experimental insights into 
the self hsp65-directed regulatory T cell repertoire in AA would help develop 
better immunotherapeutic approaches for autoimmune arthritis.
