Electrotransfer is a simple and efficient strategy of nonviral gene delivery. We 
have used this method to deliver plasmids encoding three human tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha soluble receptor I variants (hTNFR-Is) a monomeric hTNFR-Is, a 
chimeric hTNFR-Is/mIgG1, and a dimeric (hTNFR-Is)(2) form. Electrotransfer 
parameters were studied and because anti-TNF strategies have proven efficient 
for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in clinics, we used a collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) mouse model to assess the efficacy of our constructs in the 
treatment of the disease. All proteins were proven bioactive, both in vitro and 
ex vivo. Plasmid intramuscular electrotransfer in mice resulted in a local 
expression of the three variants for at least 6 months; systemic expression 
lasted also more than 6 months for the hTNFR-Is/mIgG1 form, while it was shorter 
for the two other forms. This expression was plasmid dose-dependent. 
Electrotransfer of 50 microg of hTNFR-Is/mIgG1 at the onset of a CIA induced a 
clear-cut decrease in both clinical and histologic signs of the disease; the 
dimeric form also showed some efficacy. Moreover, the long-lasting protective 
effect was observed for more than 5 weeks. Comparison of this electrotransfer 
approach with repeated recombinant protein (etanercept) injections highlighted 
the potential practical interest of gene therapy approach for CIA, which leads 
to sustained therapeutic effect after single treatment. These results show that 
electrotransfer may be a useful method to deliver cytokine or anticytokine 
therapy in rheumatoid arthritis and also illustrate the potentiality of plasmid 
intramuscular electrotransfer for the rapid screening and assessment of 
different variant forms of secreted proteins.
