TNF-alpha has been found to play a pivotal role in the pathogenic mechanisms of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The overexpression of TNF-alpha in RA synovium, the 
data from in vitro synovial cell cultures with the use of anti-TNF-alpha 
antibody and the results from TNF-alpha blockade in animal models of arthritis 
argued for the importance of this cytokine in RA. Drugs targeting TNF-alpha have 
been developed to neutralise the deleterious effects of this inflammatory 
cytokine. There are currently three drugs available in the treatment of RA 
patients with active disease, which was refractory to conventional treatments 
including methotrexate, infliximab (a chimeric mouse/human monoclonal antibody), 
etanercept (a fusion protein combining 2 p75 TNF receptors with a Fc fragment of 
human IgG (1)) and adalimumab (a fully human monoclonal antibody). These three 
drugs have proved to be effective and safe in appropriate and well conducted 
clinical trials and showed effectiveness in slowing and even arresting the 
progression of radiographic damage. With the long-term surveillance of these 
drugs serious adverse events were described, particularly intracellular organism 
infections such as tuberculosis. Other drugs targeting TNF-alpha are in 
development and include monoclonal antibody (CDP571), pegylated molecules 
(CDP870 and PEG-r-Hu-sTNF-RI) or soluble p55 TNF receptor construct (lenercept). 
These new biological therapies blocking TNF-alpha undoubtedly constitute a 
considerable advance in the management of RA, but careful evaluation at the 
initiation of the treatment and long-term surveillance of the patients receiving 
such drugs remains necessary.
