Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha is produced by cells of the immune system and 
is a key mediator in immune and inflammatory reactions. Through interaction with 
widely expressed receptors (TNF receptor 1 and TNF receptor 2), TNF-alpha is 
able to orchestrate the expression of a range of downstream proinflammatory 
molecules. Over the past decade novel biologics that inhibit TNF-alpha have been 
developed as extremely effective treatments for rheumatoid arthritis. 
Structurally, these biologics are antibodies, or TNF receptors on an antibody 
backbone that bind TNF-alpha directly and are delivered to patients by repeated 
injection. Gene therapy offers an improved approach to delivering biologics as a 
single administration of their encoding genetic material. In the present study 
we demonstrate the therapeutic effect of a small molecular weight dimeric TNF 
receptor 2 (dTNFR) constitutively expressed from plasmid DNA, delivered 
intramuscularly with electroporation, after disease onset in a collagen-induced 
arthritis model. Regulated promoters that enable the production of a transgene 
to be controlled are more suited to the application of gene therapy in the 
clinic. Regulated expression of dTNFR from the plasmid pGTRTT was also 
therapeutic in the mouse collagen-induced arthritis model when the inducer 
doxycycline was also administered, whereas no therapeutic effect was observed in 
the absence of doxycycline. The therapeutic effect of dTNFR expressed from a 
constitutive or regulated plasmid was dependent on the degree of disease 
activity at the time of DNA injection. The observations of this study are 
considered with regard to the disease model, the magnitude of gene regulation, 
and the path to clinical application.
