OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: To examine the effects of PTK787/ZK222584, a novel 
angiogenesis inhibitor, in a series of in vivo models of arthritis and 
inflammation.
MATERIALS: The granulomatous air pouch and antigen-induced arthritis models were 
established in female OFA-1 mice. Female DBA/1LacJ mice were used for the 
collagen-induced arthritis model and male OFA rats were used for the carrageenan 
oedema and hyperalgesia tests.
TREATMENT: PTK787/ZK222584 was administered p.o., once daily, at various 
concentrations. Diclofenac (3 mg/kg) and DUP697 (0.5 mg/kg) were also given p.o, 
once daily.
METHODS: The anti-angiogenic effects of PTK787/ZK222584 were directly assessed 
in the granulomatous air pouch model using the carmine red assay. The 
anti-arthritic effects of this compound were further examined in the mouse 
antigen-induced and collagen-induced models of arthritis, using macroscopic 
observations (calliper measurements of joints) and histological scores (as 
assessed by degree of cellularity, cell infiltration and erosions and 
proteoglycan loss). All compounds were administered orally. PTK787/ZK222584 at 
10, 30, 50 and 100 mg/kg and positive control compounds, diclofenac and DUP697 
at 3 mg/kg and 0.5 mg/kg, respectively. In addition, the effects of 
PTK787/ZK222584 in the rat carrageenan oedema model and Randall Selitto 
hyperalgesia test were observed.
RESULTS: PTK787/ZK222584 treatment caused dose dependent reduction in the 
vascularity of the granulomatous air pouch model. It inhibited knee swelling by 
40% in antigen-induced arthritis, at the dose of 30 mg/kg p.o., once daily 
(s.i.d). and inhibited both severity scores (by 51%) and global histological 
scores in mice with collagen-induced arthritis following oral treatment (45 
mg/kg p.o.), as compared to control animals. PTK787/ZK222584 demonstrated no 
effects on inflammatory mediators in the VEGF-independent rat carrageenan model 
and displayed interesting analgesic activity in the Randall Selitto test in the 
acute setting.
CONCLUSIONS: The anti-arthritic effects of this specific, receptor tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor compound appear to be mediated by anti-angiogenic actions. This 
study represents a new indication for PTK787/ZK222584, namely, rheumatoid 
arthritis and further supports the belief that angiogenesis inhibition is likely 
to be beneficial in the therapy of this condition.
