The peripheral nervous system, in addition to its sensory and motor functions, 
can induce a local inflammatory response known as neurogenic inflammation. This 
phenomenon plays a critical role in several inflammatory diseases, e.g., asthma, 
atopy, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and ulcerative colitis. Neurogenic 
inflammation and the role of nerve growth factor (NGF) have been extensively 
studied in psoriasis. There are increased levels of NGF in the keratinocytes and 
upregulation of NGF receptor (NGF-R) in the cutaneous nerves of psoriatic 
plaques. NGF can influence all the salient pathologic events noticed in 
psoriasis such as proliferation of keratinocytes, angiogenesis, T cell 
activation, expression of adhesion molecules, proliferation of cutaneous nerves, 
and upregulation of neuropeptides. In this double-blinded, placebo-controlled 
study, we addressed the role of NGF/NGF-R in psoriasis in an in vivo system 
using the severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mouse-human skin model of 
psoriasis. The transplanted psoriatic plaques on the SCID mice (n=12) were 
treated with K252a, a high-affinity NGF receptor blocker. Psoriasis 
significantly improved following 2 wk of therapy. The length of the rete pegs 
changed from 308.57+/-98.72 to 164.64+/-46.78 microm (p<0.01, Student's t test). 
A similar improvement of psoriasis was observed by directly inhibiting NGF with 
NGF-neutralizing antibody. NGF-neutralizing antibody in normal saline at 10 ng 
(n=4) and 20 ng (n=4) per kilogram of body weight doses were used. Both doses of 
NGF-neutralizing antibody reduced rete peg lengths significantly, e.g., from 
298.5+/-42.69 to 150.52+/-32.93 microm (p<0.05, Student's t test). This study 
provides evidence for the role of NGF and its high-affinity receptor in the 
pathogenesis of psoriasis and insights to develop novel therapeutic modalities.
