PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Initial studies of the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis 
focused on the role of rheumatoid factor and immune complex-associated 
vasculitis and synovitis. Subsequent work has delineated T cell responses, the 
role of cytokines, chemokines, and the aggressive nature of rheumatoid 
synovitis. Recent findings underscore the importance of humoral immunity in this 
entity and are the subject of this review.
RECENT FINDINGS: By the discovery of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, 
anti-RA33, and anti-GPI antibodies in the human and mouse systems, respectively, 
the impact of humoral autoimmunity in rheumatoid arthritis regained remarkable 
interest. This review summarizes recent insights into humoral autoimmunity in 
rheumatoid arthritis in the context of the generation of rheumatoid factors, 
including B cell activation via toll-like receptors and genetic predispositions 
that can trigger the induction of rheumatoid arthritis. The generation of 
rheumatoid factors that can also be found during host defense against infectious 
agents and under pathologic conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis, Sj√∂gren 
syndrome, and hepatitis C-associated mixed cryoglobulinemia after hepatitis C 
infection is likely the result of genetic predispositions and the intensity of 
the (primary) immune reaction. Models of the role of rheumatoid factors in 
health and disease, including related lymphomagenesis, will be discussed.
SUMMARY: In patients with rheumatoid arthritis, the induction of rheumatoid 
factors can be taken as an indicator of severe disease with a striking 
involvement of B cell activation. Very recent clinical trials using B cell 
depletion support the concept that humoral immunity, as evidenced by the 
production of rheumatoid factors, plays a significant role in the course of the 
disease.
