OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether retroviral gene transfer of ribozymes 
targeting matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP-1) inhibits the production of MMP-1 in 
rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts (RASFs) and reduces the invasiveness 
of these cells in vivo.
METHODS: MMP-1-specific ribozymes (RzMMP-1) were designed and cloned into the 
pLNSX retroviral vector. Cleavage of MMP-1 was determined in vitro, and the most 
effective ribozyme was selected for further investigation. RASFs were transduced 
with replication-deficient viruses carrying RzMMP-1 or with empty viruses 
(mock). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction with cleavage site-spanning 
fluorescent probes was used to measure the levels of MMP-1, MMP-9, and MMP-13 
messenger RNA. In addition, protein levels of MMP-1 in cell culture supernatants 
were determined by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay. The effects of stimulation 
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) on the 
production of MMP-1 were assessed accordingly. The invasiveness of 
RzMMP-1-transduced, mock-transduced, and untransduced RASFs was analyzed in the 
SCID mouse in vivo model of RA.
RESULTS: Transduction of RASFs with RzMMP-1 significantly decreased the 
production of MMP-1 in RASFs without affecting other MMPs, such as MMP-9 and 
MMP-13. RzMMP-1 not only reduced the spontaneous production of MMP-1, but also 
prevented the LPS- and TNFalpha-induced increase in MMP-1 production. Inhibition 
of MMP-1 was maintained for at least 2 months and was accompanied by a 
significant reduction of the invasiveness of RASFs in the SCID mouse model of 
RA.
CONCLUSION: Intracellular expression of ribozymes constitutes a feasible tool 
for inhibiting the production of matrix-degrading enzymes. Inhibition of MMP-1 
alone results in a significant reduction of cartilage invasion by RASFs.
