OBJECTIVE: Midkine (MK), a heparin-binding growth factor, promotes growth, 
survival, and migration of various cells. The essential role of MK in migration 
of inflammatory cells has been shown using mice deficient in the MK gene 
(Mdk(-/-) mice). We undertook this study to investigate the role of MK in the 
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: MK levels in specimens from patients were determined by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay, and localization of MK was revealed by immunohistochemical 
analysis. Susceptibility to antibody-induced arthritis was compared between 
Mdk(-/-) and wild-type (WT) mice. Osteoclast differentiation was monitored using 
macrophage-like cells isolated from human synovial tissue and macrophages from 
mouse bone marrow.
RESULTS: MK levels in sera and synovial fluid were increased in most RA 
patients, indicating a strong correlation between MK expression and RA. MK was 
expressed in macrophage-like cells and fibroblast-like cells in synovial 
membranes from the patients. In antibody-induced arthritis, Mdk(-/-) mice seldom 
developed the disease, while most of the WT mice did. Administration of MK to 
the Mdk(-/-) mice increased the frequency of antibody-induced arthritis. 
Migration of inflammatory leukocytes to the synovial membranes in the disease 
model was suppressed in the Mdk(-/-) mice. Furthermore, MK was found to promote 
the differentiation of osteoclasts from macrophages.
CONCLUSION: MK participates in each of the two distinct phases of RA 
development, namely, migration of inflammatory leukocytes and osteoclast 
differentiation, and is a key molecule in the pathogenesis of RA.
