Interleukin (IL)-18 is a member of the IL-1 cytokine family. Its expression is 
increased in rheumatoid arthritis synovium, and its proinflammatory effects have 
been demonstrated in experimental models of murine arthritis. Here, we 
investigate the actions of varying doses of recombinant rat IL-18 (rIL-18) on 
the course of type II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in BB rats, including 
clinical and immune events, plus splenic cytokine production. Small doses of 
rIL-18 (10 and 50 microg/rat) administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) increased 
arthritis incidence and severity (P < 0.01) when a low-potency CII preparation 
was used for immunization. IgG1 and IgG2a anti-CII antibody levels were 
significantly greater in rats given 10 and 50 microg rIL-18 doses than controls. 
rIL-18 significantly increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines [interferon 
(IFN)-gamma, IL-2, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and IL-6] produced by 
splenocyte cultures. Larger doses of rIL-18 (300 microg/rat) suppressed 
arthritis and immunity. To ascertain whether the pro-arthritic effects of IL-18 
could be attenuated, rats were treated with neutralizing rabbit anti-rIL-18 IgG 
before immunization with a high-potency CII preparation. When given serially for 
3 weeks, the incidence and severity of CIA, in addition to anti-CII IgG2a and 
splenic IL-6 and IFN-gamma production, were all significantly reduced. Similar 
results were noted when antibody was given twice, just before arthritis onset. 
These results demonstrate that IL-18 plays an important proinflammatory role in 
the pathogenesis of CIA which is achieved, in part, by an immunostimulatory 
action. Neutralizing endogenous IL-18 with antibodies attenuated CIA, CII 
immunity and cytokine responses. These studies support the use of IL-18 
antagonists as treatments for inflammatory arthritis.
