We evaluated the therapeutic effect of secretory phospholipase A2 
(sPLA2)-inhibitory peptide at a cellular level on joint erosion, cartilage 
destruction, and synovitis in the human tumor necrosis factor (TNF) transgenic 
mouse model of arthritis. Tg197 mice (N = 18) or wild-type (N = 10) mice at 4 
weeks of age were given intraperitoneal doses (7.5 mg/kg) of a selective sPLA2 
inhibitory peptide, P-NT.II, or a scrambled P-NT.II (negative control), three 
times a week for 4 weeks. Untreated Tg197 mice (N = 10) were included as 
controls. Pathogenesis was monitored weekly for 4 weeks by use of an arthritis 
score and histologic examinations. Histopathologic analysis revealed a 
significant reduction after P-NT.II treatment in synovitis, bone erosion, and 
cartilage destruction in particular. Conspicuous ultrastructural alterations 
seen in articular chondrocytes (vacuolated cytoplasm and loss of nuclei) and 
synoviocytes (disintegrating nuclei and vacuoles, synovial adhesions) of 
untreated or scrambled-P-NT.II-treated Tg197 mice were absent in the 
P-NT.II-treated Tg197 group. Histologic scoring and ultrastructural evidence 
suggest that the chondrocyte appears to be the target cell mainly protected by 
the peptide during arthritis progression in the TNF transgenic mouse model. This 
is the first time ultrastructural evaluation of this model has been presented. 
High levels of circulating sPLA2 detected in untreated Tg197 mice at age 8 weeks 
of age were reduced to basal levels by the peptide treatment. Attenuation of 
lipopolysaccharide- and TNF-induced release of prostaglandin E2 from cultured 
macrophage cells by P-NT.II suggests that the peptide may influence the 
prostaglandin-mediated inflammatory response in rheumatoid arthritis by limiting 
the bioavailability of arachidonic acid through sPLA2 inhibition.
