Application of a finger-printing method to the analysis of human milk 
oligosaccharides led to the finding that several oligosaccharides were missing 
in the milk of non-secretor or Lewis-negative individuals. This finding helped 
us in opening the door of elucidating the enzymatic basis of blood types in 
human. Based on these successful studies, a strategy to establish reliable 
techniques to elucidate the structures and functions of the N-linked sugar 
chains of glycoproteins was devised. It was to contrive enzymatic and chemical 
means to release quantitatively the N-linked sugar chains as oligosaccharides, 
and finger-print them by using appropriate methods to demonstrate the sugar 
pattern of a glycoprotein. These methods enabled us to determine that the 
N-linked sugar chains of glycoproteins can be classified into three subgroups: 
high mannose-type, complex-type, and hybrid-type. By comparative studies of the 
sugar patterns of a glycoprotein produced by different organs and different 
animals, occurrences of organ- and species-specific glycosylation were found in 
many glycoproteins. By comparative studies of the glycosylation patterns of the 
subunits constructing human chorionic gonadotropin and other glycoproteins, 
occurrence of site-directed N-glycosylation was also found, indicating that the 
processing and maturation of the N-linked sugar chains of a glycoprotein might 
be controlled by the structure of polypeptide moiety. Furthermore, these methods 
enabled us to elucidate the structural alteration of the sugar chains of a 
glycoprotein induced by diseased state of the producing cells, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis and malignancy. Recent studies of glycoproteins in the 
brain-nervous system through aging revealed that N-glycosylation of P(0) in the 
rat spinal cord is induced by aging. Therefore, glycobiology is expanding 
tremendously into fields such as pathological and gerontological research.
