OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-predisposing class 
II molecules of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) can present cartilage 
proteoglycan (PG) aggrecan, and if so, to determine the epitope repertoire of 
the human cartilage PG in HLA-transgenic mice and determine whether 
HLA-transgenic mice develop arthritis in response to immunization with human 
cartilage PG.
METHODS: Mice transgenic for HLA-DR2.Ab(0), DR3.Ab(0), DR4.Ab(0), and DQ8.Ab(0), 
lacking their own (mouse) class II antigens (Ab(0)), on the original 
(arthritis-resistant) and the arthritis-susceptible BALB/c backgrounds, were 
immunized with human cartilage PG. The T cell epitope repertoire presented by 
these class II MHC alleles was determined using a synthetic peptide library (143 
peptides of the core protein of human cartilage PG), and arthritis development 
was monitored and compared in wild-type and HLA-transgenic/congenic BALB/c mice.
RESULTS: Mice of the 4 HLA-transgenic lines, either on the original mixed, 
arthritis-resistant background or DR4.Ab(0)- and DQ8.Ab(0)-transgenic/congenic 
mice on the arthritis-susceptible BALB/c genetic background, responded well to 
PG immunization (as assessed by T cell responses and antibody and cytokine 
production), and a number of T cell epitopes along the core protein of human 
cartilage PG were identified. DR4.Ab(0)- and DQ8.Ab(0)-transgenic mice immunized 
with human cartilage PG developed arthritis, but only when these class II MHC 
molecules were present on the arthritis-susceptible (BALB/c) genetic background.
CONCLUSION: A number of human cartilage PG epitopes can be presented by HLA 
alleles that predispose to the development of RA, but the epitopes of the 
cartilage PG presented by HLA-DR4 or HLA-DQ8 can induce arthritis only in the 
presence of an appropriate genetic (non-MHC) background.
