Biomarker quantification in disease tissues from animal models of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) can help to provide insights into the mechanisms of action of 
novel therapeutic agents. In this study we validated the kinetics of IL-1beta, 
TNF-alpha and IL-6 mRNA and protein expression levels in joints from DBA/1OlaHsd 
murine collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and Lewis rat Streptococcal cell wall 
(SCW)-induced arthritis by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) TaqMan and 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Prednisolone was used as a reference 
to investigate any correlation between clinical response and cytokine levels at 
selected time-points. To our knowledge this is the first report showing a close 
pattern of expression between mRNA and protein for IL-1beta and IL-6, but not 
for TNF-alpha, in these two models of RA. The kinetics of expression for these 
biomarkers suggested that the optimal sampling time-points to study the effect 
of compounds on both inflammation and cytokine levels were day 4 postonset in 
CIA and day 3 after i.v challenge in SCW-induced arthritis. Prednisolone reduced 
joint swelling through a mechanism associated with a reduction in IL-1beta and 
IL-6 protein and mRNA expression levels. At the investigated time points, 
protein levels for TNF-alpha in arthritic joints were lower than the lower limit 
of detection of the ELISA, whereas mRNA levels for this cytokine were reliably 
detected. These observations suggest that RT-PCR TaqMan is a sensitive technique 
that can be successfully applied to the quantification of mRNA levels in rodent 
joints from experimental arthritis models providing insights into mechanisms of 
action of novel anti-inflammatory drugs.
