Dysprosium lithium-borate (DyLB) glass microspheres have been developed as a 
biodegradable radiation delivery vehicle for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis and other diseases. Radioactive microspheres of these glasses are 
intended to be injected into a joint infected with rheumatoid arthritis to 
safely deliver a localized dose (100 Gy) of beta radiation. Once injected, the 
microspheres react nonuniformly with body fluids. The nonradioactive, 
lithium-borate component is dissolved from the glass, whereas the radioactive 
(165)Dy reacts with phosphate anions in the body fluids, and becomes 
"chemically" trapped in a solid, dysprosium phosphate reaction product that has 
the same size as the unreacted microsphere. The glass microspheres lose 
approximately 80% of their weight after nonuniform reaction (<1 day), but the 
dysprosium phosphate reaction product is slowly metabolized by the body over 
several months. Ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) chelation therapy can be used 
to dissolve the dysprosium phosphate reaction product in vitro in <2 h. The 
dysprosium phosphate reaction product which formed in vivo in the joint of a 
Sprague-Dawley rat was also dissolved by EDTA chelation therapy in <1 week, 
without causing any detectable joint damage. The combination of DyLB glass 
microspheres and EDTA chelation therapy provides a unique "tool" for the medical 
community because it can deliver a large dose (>100 Gy) of localized beta 
radiation to a treatment site within the body, followed by complete 
biodegradability.
