Sj√∂gren's syndrome (SS) is an incurable, autoimmune exocrinopathy that 
predominantly affects females and whose pathogenesis remains unknown. Like 
rheumatoid arthritis, its severity increases after menopause, and estrogen 
deficiency has been implicated. We have reported that estrogen receptor-alpha 
and -beta-knockout mice develop autoimmune nephritis and myeloid leukemia, 
respectively, but neither develops SS. One model of estrogen deficiency in 
rodents is the aromatase-knockout (ArKO) mouse. In these animals, there is 
elevated B lymphopoiesis in bone marrow. We now report that ArKO mice develop 
severe autoimmune exocrinopathy resembling SS. By 1 year of age, there is B cell 
hyperplasia in the bone marrow, spleen, and blood of ArKO mice and spontaneous 
autoimmune manifestations such as proteinuria and severe leukocyte infiltration 
in the salivary glands and kidney. Also, as is typically found in human SS, 
there were proteolytic fragments of alpha-fodrin in the salivary glands and 
anti-alpha-fodrin antibodies in the serum of both female and male ArKO mice. 
When mice were raised on a phytoestrogen-free diet, there was a mild but 
significant incidence of infiltration of B lymphocytes in WT mice and severe 
destructive autoimmune lesions in ArKO mice. In age-matched WT mice fed a diet 
containing normal levels of phytoestrogen, there were no autoimmune lesions. 
These results reveal that estrogen deficiency results in a lymphoproliferative 
autoimmune disease resembling SS and suggest that estrogen might have clinical 
value in the prevention or treatment of this disease.
