OBJECTIVE: NF-kappaB activation is associated with several inflammatory 
disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), making this family of 
transcription factors a good target for the development of antiinflammatory 
treatments. Although inhibitors of the NF-kappaB pathway are currently 
available, their specificity has not been adequately determined. IkappaBalpha is 
a physiologic inhibitor of NF-kappaB and a potent repressor experimentally when 
expressed in a nondegradable form. We describe here a novel means for 
specifically regulating NF-kappaB activity in vivo by administering a chimeric 
molecule comprising the super-repressor IkappaBalpha (srIkappaBalpha) fused to 
the membrane-transducing domain of the human immunodeficiency virus Tat protein 
(Tat-srIkappaBalpha).
METHODS: The Wistar rat carrageenan-induced pleurisy model was used to assess 
the effects of in vivo administration of Tat-srIkappaBalpha on leukocyte 
infiltration and on cytokine and chemokine production.
RESULTS: Systemic administration of Tat-srIkappaBalpha diminished infiltration 
of leukocytes into the site of inflammation. Analysis of the recruited 
inflammatory cells confirmed uptake of the inhibitor and reduction of the 
NF-kappaB activity. These cells exhibited elevated caspase activity, suggesting 
that NF-kappaB is required for the survival of leukocytes at sites of 
inflammation. Analysis of exudates, while showing decreases in the production of 
the proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-1beta, 
also revealed a significant increase in the production of the neutrophil 
chemoattractants cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant 1 (CINC-1) and 
CINC-3 compared with controls. This result could reveal a previously unknown 
feedback mechanism in which infiltrating leukocytes may down-regulate local 
production of these chemokines.
CONCLUSION: These results provide new insights into the etiology of inflammation 
and establish a strategy for developing novel therapeutics by regulating the 
signaling activity of pathways known to function in RA.
