OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to assess the role of extracellular 
cytochrome c as an inducer of joint inflammation and to examine its levels in 
sera and synovial fluids of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients.
METHODS: Mice were injected intra-articularly with different doses of cytochrome 
c and joints were evaluated histopathologically and immunohistochemically 3 and 
10 days later. In addition, mouse spleen cells were stimulated with different 
concentrations of cytochrome c, followed by assessment of NF-kappaB activation 
and cytokine production. Sera and synovial fluid from RA patients and sera from 
healthy individuals were assessed with respect to cytochrome c levels by an 
enzyme-linked immunoassay technique.
RESULTS: Histopathological signs of arthritis were evident in 75% of animals 
following intra-articular injection of cytochrome c. Synovitis was characterized 
by influx of Mac-1+ cells. In vivo depletion of neutrophils and monocytes led to 
abrogation of arthritis. Stimulation of mouse spleen cells in vitro with 
cytochrome c resulted in activation of NF-kappaB and release of proinflammatory 
cytokines and chemokines. Cytochrome c levels in RA patients' sera were 
significantly lower than in healthy controls. Further, cytochrome c levels in 
synovial fluid were significantly lower than in corresponding blood samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that extracellular cytochrome c displays 
direct proinflammatory properties mediated by activation of NF-kappaB and 
causing neutrophil and monocyte triggered inflammation. We hypothesize that 
decreased levels of cytochrome c in RA patients reflect consumption of this 
molecule in the synovial tissue, decreasing apoptosis and shifting the balance 
towards inflammation.
