OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease, characterized by 
a chronic inflammation in the joints. The model of collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) has been extensively used to elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms relevant 
to human RA and is widely employed for the evaluation of potential 
anti-rheumatic agents. Etoposide and mitoxantrone are immunosuppressive drugs, 
both acting by inhibiting the topoisomerase II function. We have previously 
demonstrated an ameliorating effect of etoposide in CIA. The aims of this study 
were (1) to assess the optimal ameliorating dose of etoposide and (2) to 
ascertain that topoisomerase II inhibition, irrespective of the chemical 
composition of the drug, affects the course of autoimmunity.
METHODS: Male DBA/1 mice were treated with 12.5 mg/kg body weight of etoposide 
five times, twice, once per week or once every second week. Mitoxantrone was 
administered as high dose (1 mg/kg body weight five times after immunization or 
after booster with collagen II) or low dose (3 microg/mouse, 5 days/week 
starting after collagen II immunization or after booster).
RESULTS: Treatment with 12.5 mg/kg body weight five times or twice weekly with 
etoposide completely inhibited development of arthritis. Low-dose treatment with 
mitoxantrone after collagen II immunization or high-dose treatment after 
collagen II booster delayed the onset of arthritis. These results were observed 
clinically as well as histologically. In addition, serum levels of anti-collagen 
II antibodies were significantly lower in mice displaying less severe arthritis.
CONCLUSION: Treatment of collagen-induced arthritis with topoisomerase II 
inhibitors ameliorates the development of disease.
