Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is an animal model of human rheumatoid 
arthritis that can be induced in susceptible mice by immunization with type II 
collagen (CII) or with collagen fragments, including cyanogen bromide (CB) 
peptides. One susceptible mouse strain, B10.RIII (I-Ar), has previously been 
found to respond to two major T-cell determinants, namely CII 610-618 
(GPAGTAGAR) within CB10 and CII 445-453 (GPAGPAGER) within CB8. Although CB10 
contains the immunodominant determinant, it is not arthritogenic. Using 
recombinant techniques, the determinant within CB10 was mutated to 
rCB10(T614P,A617E), generating a recombinant CB10 that in effect contained the 
arthritogenic epitope. When used for immunization, rCB10(T614P,A617E) was 
arthritogenic. This suggested that the arthritogenic property was intrinsic to 
the epitope and unrelated to its position within the CII molecule. To test this 
hypothesis, additional mutants were generated. The wild-type T-cell epitope of 
CB10 was deleted from its natural position, and the 'arthritogenic' GPAGPAGER 
T-cell epitope was inserted into the C-terminal portion of the CB10 peptide. The 
resulting peptide induced arthritis in B10.RIII mice. Adding a second copy of 
the T-cell determinant to other sites within CB10, however, had varying results. 
A second T-cell epitope located at the C-terminus of rCB10 significantly 
increased the incidence and severity of arthritis, while determinants placed in 
other positions had little effect. These data indicate that the T-cell epitope 
has intrinsic arthritogenic properties, but there are positional and structural 
constraints that affect its arthritogenicity. Enhanced arthritis was associated 
with an increased T-cell proliferation to the peptides, an increase in the level 
of inflammatory cytokines, and higher levels of anti-CII immunoglobulin. These 
data suggest that the position and copy number of T-cell determinants also 
affect the overall immune T-cell responses.
