OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular mechanisms of the antiarthritic effects 
of bee venom (BV) and melittin (a major component of BV) in a murine macrophage 
cell line (Raw 264.7) and in synoviocytes obtained from patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis.
METHODS: We evaluated the antiarthritic effects of BV in a rat model of 
carrageenan-induced acute edema in the paw and in a rat model of chronic 
adjuvant-induced arthritis. The inhibitory effects of BV and melittin on 
inflammatory gene expression were measured by Western blotting, and the 
generation of prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) and nitric oxide (NO) and the 
intracellular calcium level were assayed. NF-kappaB DNA binding and 
transcriptional activity were determined by gel mobility shift assay or by 
luciferase assay. Direct binding of BV and melittin to the p50 subunit of 
NF-kappaB was determined with a surface plasmon resonance analyzer.
RESULTS: BV (0.8 and 1.6 mug/kg) reduced the effects of carrageenan- and 
adjuvant-induced arthritis. This reducing effect was consistent with the 
inhibitory effects of BV (0.5, 1, and 5 mug/ml) and melittin (5 and 10 mug/ml) 
on lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 1 mug/ml)-induced expression of cyclooxygenase 2, 
cytosolic phospholipase A(2), inducible NO synthase, generation of PGE(2) and 
NO, and the intracellular calcium level. BV and melittin prevented LPS-induced 
transcriptional and DNA binding activity of NF-kappaB via the inhibition of 
IkappaB release and p50 translocation. BV (affinity [K(d)] = 4.6 x 10(-6)M) and 
melittin (K(d) = 1.2 x 10(-8)M) bound directly to p50.
CONCLUSION: Target inactivation of NF-kappaB by directly binding to the p50 
subunit is an important mechanism of the antiarthritic effects of BV.
