OBJECTIVE: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) has been shown to inhibit 
germ cell death in human seminiferous epithelium. In the present study, we 
wanted to explore the effects of TNF-alpha in the rat seminiferous epithelium 
and to study molecular mechanisms of germ cell apoptosis. Furthermore, the 
effects of infliximab were studied. Infliximab is a TNF-alpha antagonist used in 
autoimmune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis and Crohn's disease.
METHODS: Rat seminiferous tubule segments were cultured in the presence and 
absence of TNF-alpha, infliximab and SN50, a NF-kappa B inhibitor. 
TUNEL-staining and cleaved caspase-3 immunohistochemistry combined with squash 
preparations of rat seminiferous tubule segments were used to evaluate the 
number of apoptotic cells. Western blot analyses were performed on cultured 
seminiferous tubule segments for Bcl-2 family proteins (Bax, Bad, Bcl-w, Bcl-xL) 
and fas ligand.
RESULTS: TNF-alpha promotes cell survival in the rat seminiferous epithelium, 
and this prosurvival effect can be blocked by infliximab, a TNF-alpha 
antagonist. Bcl-xL was found to be upregulated in mitochondrial membranes by 
TNF-alpha, and this upregulation was inhibited by infliximab. Inhibition of 
NF-kappa B translocation to the nucleus prevented the prosurvival effect of 
TNF-alpha on seminiferous epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrates that TNF-alpha promotes cell 
survival in the rat seminiferous epithelium, and this effect can be blocked by 
infliximab. This is the first study to show the effects of infliximab in the 
testis. The prosurvival effect of TNF-alpha might be at least partly mediated by 
modulating the expression and subcellular localization of Bcl-2 family proteins.
