Thrombospondin 2 (TSP2), a matricellular protein with a primary role in 
modulating cell-matrix interactions, has been implicated in tissue repair and 
foreign body responses. Here we show that TSP2 has regulatory function in the 
chronic inflammatory lesions of rheumatoid arthritis. Tissue TSP2, produced by 
synovial fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages correlated not only 
with the intensity of angiogenesis but also with the architecture of lymphoid 
infiltrates. Synovial tissues with diffuse inflammatory infiltrates had high 
levels of TSP2, whereas synovial tissues with ectopic germinal center reactions 
and T cell-B cell aggregates produced low levels. Cell-based gene therapy with 
TSP2 was used to examine the in vivo effects of the matrix protein on 
neoangiogenesis and lymphoid organization. Human synovium-severe combined 
immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse chimeras were treated with TSP2-transfected 
fibroblasts deposited into the peritoneum. Overexpression of TSP2 led to the 
accumulation of TSP2 protein in the inflamed synovium and resulted in a prompt 
inhibition of lesional vascularization. Beside its anti-angiogenic activity, 
TSP2 also suppressed the production of the proinflammatory mediators, 
interferon-gamma and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, and induced the depletion of 
tissue-residing T cells. We propose that TSP2 is an endogenous regulator of 
angiogenesis and autoimmune inflammation in the synovium and represents a 
protective mechanism preventing ectopic lympho-organogenesis and persistent 
inflammation in this tissue site.
