Tumor necrosis factor-like weak inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK) is a member of the 
tumor necrosis factor superfamily of structurally related cytokines. TWEAK acts 
on responsive cells via binding to a cell surface receptor named Fn14. Recent 
studies have demonstrated that TWEAK can stimulate numerous cellular responses 
including cell proliferation, migration, and proinflammatory molecule 
production. It has also been reported that TWEAK can stimulate blood vessel 
formation in the rat cornea angiogenesis assay, but it is presently unknown 
whether this cytokine could play a role in the pathological angiogenesis 
associated with human diseases such as cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
diabetic retinopathy. In the present study we investigated whether TWEAK was 
expressed in human tumors and whether it could promote tumor growth and 
angiogenesis in vivo. TWEAK mRNA expression was detected in many tumor types by 
cDNA array hybridization analysis, and TWEAK protein expression was confirmed in 
human colon cancer tissue by immunohistochemistry. As an initial approach to 
address whether TWEAK might act as a tumor angiogenesis factor, we established 
several human embryonic kidney cell lines that constitutively secrete a soluble 
TWEAK protein and examined their growth properties in vitro and in vivo. We 
found that although TWEAK-overexpressing cells do not have a growth advantage in 
vitro, they form larger and more highly vascularized tumors in athymic mice when 
compared with control, vector-transfected cells. This result suggests that the 
TWEAK-Fn14 signaling system may be a potential regulator of human tumorigenesis.
