To investigate effects of a 16.8-Mb region on rat chromosome 4q42-43 on 
encephalomyelitis, we performed a high-resolution mapping using a 10th 
generation advanced intercross line between the susceptible DA strain and the 
MHC identical but resistant PVG.1AV1 strain. Clinical signs of myelin 
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
(EAE) developed in 29% of 772 F(10) rats. Three regions controlling disease, 
Eae20, Eae21, and Eae22, were mapped using 15 microsatellite markers spanning 
16.8 Mb. Eae20 was a major genetic determinant within the region whereas Eae21 
modified disease severity. Eae22 was identified as an epistatic region because 
it only displayed an effect together with Piebald Virol Glaxo (PVG) alleles on 
Eae20. Disease down-regulation by PVG alleles in the telomeric part of Eae20 was 
also demonstrated in DA rats made congenic for a approximately 1.44-Mb 
chromosomal region from PVG. As the region containing Eae20-Eae22 also regulates 
arthritis, together with the fact that the syntenic mouse 6F(2)-F(3) region 
regulates experimental lupus and diabetes, and the syntenic human 12p13.31-13.2 
region regulates multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis, the present data 
point to genes that control several inflammatory diseases. The pairscan analyses 
of interaction, which here identified Eae22, are novel in the encephalomyelitis 
field and of importance in the design of further studies of this region in other 
diseases and species. The limited number of genes identified in Eae20, Eae21, 
and Eae22 enables focused examination of their relevance in mechanistic animal 
studies and screening of their association to human diseases.
