Infliximab (IFX) is a chimeric IgG1 monoclonal antibody specific for human tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha that is approved in the United States and Europe for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and Crohn's disease (CD). Approximately 
10% of RA and CD patients receiving maintenance treatment with IFX will develop 
antibodies to IFX. The objective of this study was to develop a model to assess 
the in vivo formation, distribution, and elimination of immune complexes 
resulting from a low-level immune response in the presence of the excess 
concentration of a therapeutic antigen. In this model, cynomolgus monkeys were 
treated with a single intravenous injection of IFX, followed by injection of 
either radiolabeled, purified monkey anti-IFX IgG antibody (n = 3, test group) 
or radiolabeled monkey, nonimmune IgG (n = 3, control group). High-performance 
liquid chromatography analysis of collected sera revealed a rapid formation of 
immune complexes comprised of IFX and radiolabeled anti-IFX IgG antibody immune 
complexes. The terminal half-life of the anti-IFX IgG antibody immune complex 
was approximately 38 h compared with 86 h for the nonimmune antibody. However, 
the pharmacokinetic profile of IFX, although slightly lower in concentration 
over time for the test group, was not notably different relative to the control 
group. There were no macroscopic or microscopic histological findings in either 
treatment group. These data confirm that immune complexes between IFX and 
anti-IFX IgG antibodies can form in vivo and that these immune complexes are 
eliminated more rapidly than nonimmune antibodies in the presence of excess IFX.
