OBJECTIVE: To study lymphocyte markers in rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-associated 
interstitial pneumonitis (IP) compared with idiopathic IP.
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded lung biopsy specimens from patients with RA (n = 15) 
and from those without RA (n = 16), all of whom had a diagnosis of either 
nonspecific IP or usual IP, were studied. Tissue sections from each patient were 
reviewed by a pathologist, who was blinded to the clinical data. Age and 
pulmonary function test results were similar in RA and non-RA patients. After 
high-temperature antigen unmasking, sections were incubated with mouse 
monoclonal antibodies directed against CD3, CD4, CD8, CD16, and CD20. All slides 
were coded, and digital images (100x magnification) of the entire tissue area 
were obtained. Staining was quantified using computer-assisted image analysis.
RESULTS: Staining for CD4 was more prominent in patients with RA than in the 
non-RA comparison group (median 9.3 cells/mm(2), interquartile range [IQR] 
5.5-27.3 versus 0.6 cells/mm(2), IQR 0.2-1.9; P = 0.002). CD4+ cell counts were 
increased in RA patients with nonspecific IP as well as in RA patients with 
usual IP, with no major difference between these groups. Results were similar 
for quantification of CD3 (P = 0.012). There was a less striking trend toward 
more CD8+ cells in RA patients (P = 0.27 versus those with non-RA lung disease).
CONCLUSION: IP lesions in patients with RA are characterized by an increased 
number of CD4+ cells, as compared with that in patients with idiopathic IP. This 
finding suggests that CD4+ T cells are critical for the development of pulmonary 
manifestations in RA, and may have implications for the treatment of 
RA-associated lung disease.
