This study was designed to clarify the effects of D-penicillamine (DPA), a drug 
used for treatment of various pathological events, on lung elastin formation and 
maturation of the newborn in the perinatal period. The investigation was 
conducted on 20 newborn rats bred from 40 female and six male rats. DPA doses 
400 mg kg(-1) day(-1) and physiological saline were given intraperitoneally 
(i.p) to experimental and control groups. To assess newborn maturation, their 
body and lung weights were determined. Serum Cu levels were measured by atomic 
absorption spectroscopy and ceruloplasmin (Cp) activities were measured 
spectrophotometrically. Newborn lung tissue elastin, desmosine (DES) and 
isodesmosine (IDES) levels were measured by HPLC. The results showed that DPA 
treatment caused loss of skin elasticity and reduction in body and lung weight 
in newborns of the experimental group. The serum Cu levels and Cp activity were 
found to be significantly lower in both maternal and newborn of the experimental 
groups compared with the control group. The lung DES, IDES and elastin values of 
newborns in the experimental group were decreased compared with the control 
group. In conclusion, our results indicate that 400 mg kg(-1) day(-1) DPA, a 
dose that is used in the treatment of Wilson's disease, rheumatoid arthritis and 
cystinuria, caused the retardation of newborn maturation, a decrease in DES-IDES 
cross-links and levels of lung elastin of offspring in the perinatal period. 
Another conclusion to be drawn from this study is that even low levels of Cu 
depletion due to DPA administration induces a change in cross-linking in lung 
elastin during the perinatal period.
