The production of autoreactive antibodies from self-reactive B cells results in 
the formation of immune complexes that deposit in tissue and fix complement, 
contributing to the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Earlier mouse 
models emphasize the importance of autoreactive antibodies formed against "self" 
proteins that serve as a source for T cell-mediated immune response, stemming 
from cross-reactivity and resulting in B cell activity. However, more recent 
models suggest the need for both autoantibodies and the initiation of the 
inflammatory cascade via the alternative complement pathway, which is unbridled 
as the cartilage lacks the usual regulatory proteins of the complement system. 
Furthermore, deficiencies in specific complement proteins could lead to an 
escape from negative selection by these self-reactive B cells. Moreover, the 
classical complement pathway establishes chemotactic gradients by which 
inflammatory cells follow and accumulate in the synovial fluid where they engulf 
immune complexes and release proteolytic enzymes. In addition, the processing of 
circulating immune complexes either via Fc receptor or CR1 and opsonization by 
complement fragments plays a key role in determining the fate of immune status. 
In addition, complement proteins are a major determinant in the size and 
solubility of an immune complex, which also affects clearance. The evidence 
regarding intra-articular activation of the complement system in RA provides the 
possibility to pharmacologically manipulate various parts of the complement 
system for therapeutic purposes and potential therapeutic targets for the 
control of inflammation and the prevention of joint destruction.
