Although the pathogenesis of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), a model of 
rheumatoid arthritis, is mediated by both collagen-specific CD4(+) T cells and 
Ab specific for type II collagen (CII), the role of CII-specific T cells in the 
pathogenesis of CIA remains unclear. Using tetrameric HLA-DR1 with a covalently 
bound immunodominant CII peptide, CII(259-273), we studied the development of 
the CII-specific T cell response in the periphery and arthritic joints of DR1 
transgenic mice. Although the maximum number of DR1-CII-tetramer(+) cells was 
detected in draining lymph nodes 10 days postimmunization, these T cells 
accounted for only 1% or less of the CD4(+) population. After day 10, their 
numbers gradually decreased, but were still detectable on day 130. Examination 
of TCR expression and changes in CD62L, CD44(high), and CD69 expression by these 
T cells indicated that they expressed a limited TCR-BV repertoire and had 
clearly undergone activation. RT-PCR analysis of cytokine expression by the 
tetramer(+) T cells compared with tetramer(-) cells indicated the tetramer(+) 
cells expressed high levels of Th1 and proinflammatory cytokines, including 
IL-2, IFN-gamma, IL-6, TNF-alpha, and especially IL-17. Additionally, analysis 
of the synovium from arthritic paws indicated that the same 
CD4(+)/BV8(+)/BV14(+)/tetramer(+) T cells were present in the arthritic joints. 
These data demonstrate that although only small numbers of CII-specific T cells 
are generated during the development of CIA, these cells express very high 
levels of cytokine mRNA and appear to preferentially migrate to the arthritic 
joint, indicating a potential direct role of CII-specific T cells in the 
pathogenesis of CIA.
