IL-1 (interleukin-1) acts as a key mediator of the degeneration of articular 
cartilage in RA (rheumatoid arthritis) and OA (osteoarthritis),where chondrocyte 
death is observed. It is still controversial, however, whether IL-1 induces 
chondrocyte death. In the present study, the viability of mouse chondrocyte-like 
ATDC5 cells was reduced by the treatment with IL-1beta for 48 h or longer. 
IL-1beta augmented the expression of the catalytic gp91 subunit of NADPH 
oxidase, gp91phox, as well as inducible NO synthase in ATDC5 cells. Generation 
of nitrated guanosine and tyrosine suggested the formation of reactive nitrogen 
species including ONOO- (peroxynitrite), a reaction product of NO and O2-, in 
ATDC5 cells and rat primary chondrocytes treated with IL-1beta. Death of ATDC5 
cells after IL-1beta treatment was prevented by an NADPH-oxidase inhibitor, 
AEBSF[4-(2-aminoethyl)benzene-sulphonyl fluoride], an NO synthase inhibitor, 
L-NAME (NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester), and a ONOO- scavenger, uric acid. The 
viability of ATDC5 cells was reduced by the ONOO(-)-generator 
3-(4-morpholinyl)sydnonimine hydrochloride, but not by either the NO-donor 
1-hydroxy-2-oxo-3-(N-methyl-2-aminopropyl)-3-methyl-1-triazene or 
S-nitrosoglutathione. Disruption of mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP 
deprivation were observed in IL-1beta-treated ATDC5 cells, both of which were 
restored by L-NAME, AEBSF or uric acid. On the other hand, no morphological or 
biochemical signs indicating apoptosis were observed in these cells. These 
results suggest that the death of chondrocyte-like ATDC5 cells was mediated at 
least in part by mitochondrial dysfunction and energy depletion through ONOO- 
formation after IL-1beta treatment.
