The adipokine resistin is suggested to be an important link between obesity and 
insulin resistance. In the present study, we assessed the impact of resistin as 
inflammatogenic cytokine in the setting of arthritis. In vitro experiments on 
human PBMC were performed to assess cytokine response and transcription pathways 
of resistin-induced inflammation. Proinflammatory properties of resistin were 
evaluated in animal model by intra-articular injection of resistin followed by 
histological evaluation of the joint. Levels of resistin were assessed by ELISA 
in 74 paired blood and synovial fluid samples of patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. Results were compared with the control group comprised blood samples 
from 34 healthy individuals and 21 synovial fluids from patients with 
noninflammatory joint diseases. We now show that resistin displays potent 
proinflammatory properties by 1) strongly up-regulating IL-6 and TNF-alpha, 2) 
responding to TNF-alpha challenge, 3) enhancing its own activity by a positive 
feedback, and finally 4) inducing arthritis when injected into healthy mouse 
joints. Proinflammatory properties of resistin were abrogated by NF-kappaB 
inhibitor indicating the importance of NF-kappaB signaling pathway for 
resistin-induced inflammation. Resistin is also shown to specifically accumulate 
in the inflamed joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis and its levels 
correlate with other markers of inflammation. Our results indicate that resistin 
is a new and important member of the cytokine family with potent regulatory 
functions. Importantly, the identified properties of resistin make it a novel 
and interesting therapeutic target in chronic inflammatory diseases such as 
rheumatoid arthritis.
