Chronic pain conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and fibromyalgia are 
associated with profound hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis dysfunction 
which may exacerbate symptoms of chronic pain. HPA axis dysfunction has also 
been well documented in animal models of chronic inflammatory pain. However, the 
role of the HPA axis in animal models of neuropathic pain is currently unknown. 
Rats with a chronic constriction injury (CCI) of the sciatic nerve that 
developed marked mechanical allodynia and hyperalgesia of the injured hindpaw 
were used to determine basal and stimulatory levels of HPA axis activity. Plasma 
ACTH and corticosterone levels were increased significantly (P < 0.05) in CCI 
rats after 20 min restraint stress compared with baseline; however, the 
magnitude of the increase was no different from sham rats. Furthermore, the 
temporal profile of ACTH release over the 60 min period after termination of 
restraint was similar between CCI and sham rats suggesting normal 
glucocorticoid-mediated feedback. Restraint stress also significantly increased 
(P < 0.05) expression of the immediate early genes c-Fos and FosB within the 
hypothalamic PVN to a similar extent in CCI and sham rats. Within the 
parvocellular PVN basal expression of both CRF and AVP mRNA was no different 
between CCI and sham rats; restraint stress induced a significant 2.5 fold 
increase (P < 0.05) in CRF mRNA expression in sham rats only. These results 
suggest that, in contrast to inflammatory immune-mediated pain models where HPA 
axis function is profoundly altered, in the CCI model of neuropathic pain, basal 
HPA axis function is unchanged. Furthermore, the HPA axis responds normally to a 
novel stressor in the face of ongoing nociceptive input, a stimulus known to 
activate the HPA axis.
