Cia5 is a locus on rat chromosome 10 which regulates the severity of collagen- 
and pristane-induced arthritis (CIA and PIA). To refine the region toward 
positional identification, Cia5 subcongenic strains were generated and studied 
in PIA and CIA. The protective effect of the telomeric locus Cia5a was confirmed 
in both models. A second arthritis severity locus (Cia5d) was identified within 
the most centromeric portion of Cia5. DA.F344(Cia5d) rats had a significantly 
lower median arthritis severity index in PIA, but not in CIA, compared with DA. 
On histologic analyses DA.F344(Cia5a) and DA.F344(Cia5d) congenics with PIA 
preserved a nearly normal joint architecture compared with DA, including 
significant reduction in synovial hyperplasia, pannus, angiogenesis, 
inflammatory infiltration, bone and cartilage erosions. Cia5 and Cia5a synovial 
levels of IL-1beta mRNA were reduced. Although both DA.F344(Cia5) and 
DA.F344(Cia5a) rats were protected in CIA, the arthritis scores of DA.F344(Cia5) 
were significantly higher than those of DA.F344(Cia5a), suggesting the existence 
of a third locus where F344-derived alleles centromeric from Cia5a contribute to 
increased arthritis severity. The existence of the third locus was further 
supported by higher levels of autoantibodies against rat type II collagen in 
DA.F344(Cia5) congenics compared with DA.F344(Cia5a). Our results determined 
that Cia5 contains three major arthritis severity regulatory loci regulating 
central events in the pathogenesis of arthritis, and differentially influencing 
CIA and PIA. These loci are syntenic to regions on human chromosomes 17q and 5q 
implicated in the susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis, suggesting that the 
identification of these genes will be relevant to human disease.
