The human leukocyte antigen B27 (HLA-B27) transgenic rat is a model of human 
inflammatory bowel disease, rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis. Studies of 
chronic inflammation in other rat models have demonstrated activation of the 
kallikrein-kinin system as well as modulation by a plasma kallikrein inhibitor 
initiated before the onset of clinicopathologic changes or a deficiency in 
high-molecular-mass kininogen. Here we study the effects of monoclonal antibody 
C11C1, an antibody against high-molecular-mass kininogen that inhibits the 
binding of high-molecular-mass kininogen to leukocytes and endothelial cells in 
the HLA-B27 rat, which was administered after the onset of the inflammatory 
changes. Thrice-weekly intraperitoneal injections of monoclonal antibody C11C1 
or isotype IgG1 were given to male 23-week-old rats for 16 days. Stool character 
as a measure of intestinal inflammation, and the rear limbs for clinical signs 
of arthritis (tarsal joint swelling and erythema) were scored daily. The animals 
were killed and the histology sections were assigned a numerical score for 
colonic inflammation, synovitis, and cartilage damage. Administration of 
monoclonal C11C1 rapidly decreased the clinical scores of pre-existing 
inflammatory bowel disease (P < 0.005) and arthritis (P < 0.001). Histological 
analyses confirmed significant reductions in colonic lesions (P = 0.004) and 
synovitis (P = 0.009). Decreased concentrations of plasma prekallikrein and 
high-molecular-mass kininogen were found, providing evidence of activation of 
the kallikrein-kinin system. The levels of these biomarkers were reversed by 
monoclonal antibody C11C1, which may have therapeutic potential in human 
inflammatory bowel disease and arthritis.
