Several lines of evidence support the hypothesis that c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
(JNKs) plays a critical role in a wide range of diseases including cell death 
(apoptosis)-related disorders (neurodegenerative diseases, brain, heart, and 
renal ischemia, epilepsy) and inflammatory disorders (multiple sclerosis, 
rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel diseases). Screening of our internal 
compound collection for inhibitors of JNK3 led to the identification of 
(benzothiazol-2-yl)acetonitrile derivatives as potent and selective JNK1, -2, -3 
inhibitors. Starting from initial hit 1 (AS007149), the chemistry and initial 
structure-activity relationship (SAR) of this novel and unique kinase inhibitor 
template were explored. Investigation of the SAR rapidly revealed that the 
benzothiazol-2-ylacetonitrile pyrimidine core was crucial to retain a good level 
of potency on rat JNK3. Therefore, compound 6 was further optimized by exploring 
a number of distal combinations in place of the chlorine atom. This led to the 
observation that the presence of an aromatic group, two carbons away from the 
aminopyrimidine moiety and bearing substituents conferring hydrogen bond 
acceptor (HBA) properties, could improve the potency. Further improvements to 
the biological and biopharmaceutical profile of the most promising compounds 
were performed, resulting in the discovery of compound 59 (AS601245). The in 
vitro and in vivo anti-inflammatory potential of this new JNK inhibitor was 
investigated and found to demonstrate efficacy per oral route in an experimental 
model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
