BACKGROUND: CC-family chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) is implicated in the 
trafficking of blood-borne monocytes to sites of inflammation and is implicated 
in the pathogenesis of several inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis, multiple sclerosis and atherosclerosis. The major challenge in the 
development of small molecule chemokine receptor antagonists is the lack of 
cross-species activity to the receptor in the preclinical species. Rabbit models 
have been widely used to study the role of various inflammatory molecules in the 
development of inflammatory processes. Therefore, in this study, we report the 
cloning and characterization of rabbit CCR2. Data regarding the activity of the 
CCR2 antagonist will provide valuable tools to perform toxicology and efficacy 
studies in the rabbit model.
RESULTS: Sequence alignment indicated that rabbit CCR2 shares 80 % identity to 
human CCR2b. Tissue distribution indicated that rabbit CCR2 is abundantly 
expressed in spleen and lung. Recombinant rabbit CCR2 expressed as stable 
transfectants in U-937 cells binds radiolabeled 125I-mouse JE (murine MCP-1) 
with a calculated Kd of 0.1 nM. In competition binding assays, binding of 
radiolabeled mouse JE to rabbit CCR2 is differentially competed by human MCP-1, 
-2, -3 and -4, but not by RANTES, MIP-1alpha or MIP-1beta. U-937/rabbit CCR2 
stable transfectants undergo chemotaxis in response to both human MCP-1 and 
mouse JE with potencies comparable to those reported for human CCR2b. Finally, 
TAK-779, a dual CCR2/CCR5 antagonist effectively inhibits the binding of 
125I-mouse JE (IC50 = 2.3 nM) to rabbit CCR2 and effectively blocks 
CCR2-mediated chemotaxis.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we report the cloning of rabbit CCR2 and demonstrate 
that this receptor is a functional chemotactic receptor for MCP-1.
