Chemically modified tetracyclines are a group of non-antimicrobial tetracycline 
derivatives, which possess antiinflammatory, anticollagenolytic and 
antiproliferative properties. Here we studied the effects of four different 
chemically modified tetracyclines (CMT-1, CMT-3, CMT-8 and CMT-308) on 
proliferation and viability of cultured mouse and human mast cells. All studied 
CMTs (25 microM) effectively inhibited the viability and proliferation of human 
mast cell line (HMC-1) cells and mouse bone marrow derived mast cells (mBMMCs), 
as judged by trypan blue exclusion and by incorporation of [(3)H]thymidine. The 
antiproliferative effect of CMTs was not dependent on the stimulating growth 
factor, i.e. CMTs inhibited both IL-3 and c-kit ligand-induced proliferation of 
mBMMCs. The reduced viability of mast cells was due to induction of apoptosis, 
as indicated by the increased amount of apoptotic nucleosomes and the appearance 
of TUNEL positive cells in the presence of CMTs. The induction of apoptosis was 
further confirmed by showing that CMT-3 induces activation of caspase-3 and 
caspase-9 in HMC-1 cells. Additionally, CMT-3 induced downregulation of the 
expression of antiapoptotic Bcl-2 protein in HMC-1 cells. Compared to 
doxycycline, the antiproliferative and proapoptotic effects of different CMTs 
were clearly more pronounced. Of the studied CMTs, CMT-3 and CMT-8 appeared to 
be the most potent inhibitors of mast cell proliferation and survival. The 
present results show that CMTs have an antiproliferative and proapoptotic effect 
on both malignant and non-malignant mast cells. In conclusion, CMTs could offer 
a novel means to treat disorders with inappropriate expansion of mast cells, 
such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic mast cell diseases.
