BACKGROUND: The tolerability and the anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive 
properties of a novel designed non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, M2000 
(beta-D-mannuronic acid), were investigated in various experimental models.
MATERIAL/METHODS: The anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive properties of 
M2000 were tested in experimental models of rheumatoid arthritis (AIA) and 
multiple sclerosis (EAE). Its therapeutic potency on kidney diseases was studied 
using experimental models of nephrosis and immune complex glomerulonephritis 
(ICG). Biocompatibility and pharmacotoxicology assessment of M2000 was carried 
out using a fibrosarcoma cell line, zymography, and serum and urine 
determinants.
RESULTS: Data showed that oral and/or i.p. administration of M2000 significantly 
reduces paw edema and histopathological parameters in arthritic rats. The 
immunosuppressive property of M2000 could significantly diminish clinical signs 
and histological erosions in the EAE model. Lymph node cell proliferation assay 
in EAE confirmed the immunosuppressive efficacy of the tested drug. Our findings 
in ICG and experimental nephrosis showed that M2000 enables a significant 
decrease in proteinuria, BUN, serum creatinine and cholesterol, as well as 
glomerular lesion in M2000-treated rats. Moreover, this drug inhibited MMP-2 
activity. The pharmacotoxicology study showed that M2000 is the safest 
anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive drug in comparison with dexamethasone 
and conventional NSAIDs tested. Additionally, M2000 had no ulcerogenic effect on 
the rat stomach.
CONCLUSIONS: M2000 is the first novel designed NSAID with the lowest molecular 
weight, no gastro-nephrotoxicity, and therapeutic effects in glomerulonephritis 
and nephrosis and could be strongly recommended on an extensive scale as the 
safest drug for decreasing anti-inflammatory reactions.
