Multiple mechanisms of tolerance are induced by oral antigen. Low doses favor 
active suppression, whereas higher doses favor clonal anergy/deletion. Oral 
antigen induces T-helper 2 [interleukin (IL)-4/IL-10] and Th3 [transforming 
growth factor (TGF)-beta] T cells plus CD4+CD25+ regulatory cells and 
latency-associated peptide+ T cells. Induction of oral tolerance is enhanced by 
IL-4, IL-10, anti-IL-12, TGF-beta, cholera toxin B subunit, Flt-3 ligand, and 
anti-CD40 ligand. Oral (and nasal) antigen administration suppresses animal 
models of autoimmune diseases including experimental autoimmune encephalitis, 
uveitis, thyroiditis, myasthenia, arthritis, and diabetes in the non-obese 
diabetic (NOD) mouse, plus non-autoimmune diseases such as asthma, 
atherosclerosis, graft rejection, allergy, colitis, stroke, and models of 
Alzheimer's disease. Oral tolerance has been tested in human autoimmune diseases 
including multiple sclerosis (MS), arthritis, uveitis, and diabetes and in 
allergy, contact sensitivity to dinitrochlorobenzene (DNCB), and nickel allergy. 
Although positive results have been observed in phase II trials, no effect was 
observed in phase III trials of CII in rheumatoid arthritis or oral myelin and 
glatiramer acetate (GA) in MS. Large placebo effects were observed, and new 
trials of oral GA are underway. Oral insulin has recently been shown to delay 
onset of diabetes in at-risk populations, and confirmatory trials of oral 
insulin are being planned. Mucosal tolerance is an attractive approach for 
treatment of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases because of lack of toxicity, 
ease of administration over time, and antigen-specific mechanisms of action. The 
successful application of oral tolerance for the treatment of human diseases 
will depend on dose, developing immune markers to assess immunologic effects, 
route (nasal versus oral), formulation, mucosal adjuvants, combination therapy, 
and early therapy.
