The key pathologic mechanism in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the destruction of 
cartilage by fibroblasts. In a severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mouse 
model, this process can be modulated by gene transfer using invasive LS48 
fibroblasts. This study aims to investigate the effect of interleukins (IL) -11 
and -12 on cartilage destruction when transferred into LS48, and of IL-15 when 
transfected into non-invasive 3T3 cells; to compare three transduction systems 
(a lentiviral vector system, a retroviral vector system, and a particle-mediated 
gene transfer); and to establish an in vitro cartilage destruction system based 
on LS48 cells. Transduced fibroblasts were injected into SCID mice knee joints, 
and disease progression assessed microscopically. Distinctive morphologic 
pattern revealed invasion of fibroblasts into the articular cartilage by 
transfected, as well as non-transfected, LS48 cells. IL-12 and IL-15 did not 
alter swelling or cartilage destruction. Animals treated with IL-11-transfected 
cells showed reduced cartilage damage but no changes in swelling. Efficacy of 
gene transfer to establish transfected fibroblasts was shown to be >85% for 
lentiviral transfer, compared to <10% for retroviral transfer and gene gun. 
Furthermore, cells were co-incubated with porcine cartilage. Transduction of 
IL-11 led to a reduction of apoptosis in chondrocytes. These findings suggest 
that cartilage destruction by invasive fibroblasts can be modulated by gene 
transfer. Lentiviral vector systems offer the most effective approach for gene 
transduction. In vitro fibroblast/cartilage co-cultures present a convenient 
system for the assessment of novel therapeutic strategies toward reduction of 
articular destruction.
