Sinomenine is an alkaloid extracted from the Chinese medicinal plant, Sinomenium 
acutum, which has been utilized to treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in China for 
over 2000 years. Sinomenine has been shown to mediate a wide range of 
pharmacological actions which includes anti-inflammatory and anti-rheumatic 
effects. RA has been classified as a chronic immune-mediated disease that 
exhibits overlapping manifestation of inflammatory, abnormal cellular and 
hormonal immune responses with synovial hyperplasia. Since, angiogenesis is 
recognized to play a critical role in the development of RA and anti-angiogenic 
therapy has been proposed as a new therapeutic strategy for treatment of RA, we 
would like to see if sinomenine possesses anti-angiogenic property. In this 
study, sinomenine inhibited bFGF-induced proliferation of human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells (HUVEC) and arrested its cell cycle in G1 phase. Sinomenine 
disrupted tube formation of HUVEC on Matrigel and suppressed the chemotaxis of 
HUVEC. In addition, sinomenine reduced neovascularization in Matrigel plug assay 
as well as microvascular outgrowth in rat aorta ring sprouting assay. These 
results suggest that sinomenine inhibited bFGF-induced angiogenesis in vitro and 
in vivo. As the leukocytes-endothelial adhesive interactions also play an 
important role in inflammation, we found that sinomenine reduced the 
transmigration of granulocytic differentiated HL60 cells across IL-1beta 
activated HUVEC monolayer. Therefore, the inhibition of leukocytes migration 
across blood vessel walls and the anti-angiogenic effect of sinomenine may 
contribute towards its therapeutic mechanisms in alleviating the pathogenesis of 
RA.
