The p38 mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase has been implicated in the 
proinflammatory cytokine signal pathway, and its inhibitors are potentially 
useful for the treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and inflammatory bowel disease. To develop a new drug for RA, we 
synthesized a novel series of 4-phenyl-5-pyridyl-1,3-thiazoles and evaluated 
their inhibition of p38 MAP kinase, lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated release 
of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) from human monocytic THP-1 cells in 
vitro, and LPS-induced TNF-alpha production in vivo in mice. During the course 
of the study, we found that these compounds risk the inhibition of cytochrome 
P450 (CYP) isoforms by coordination of the 4-pyridyl nitrogen with heme iron. We 
therefore investigated the effects of substitution at the 2-position of the 
pyridyl ring on the inhibitory activity of p38 MAP kinase and CYPs in more 
detail. As a result, 
N-[4-[2-ethyl-4-(3-methylphenyl)-1,3-thiazol-5-yl]-2-pyridyl]benzamide (8h, 
TAK-715) exhibited potent inhibitory activity in these assays (inhibition of 
p38alpha, IC50 = 7.1 nM; LPS-stimulated release of TNF-alpha from THP-1, IC50 = 
48 nM; LPS-induced TNF-alpha production in mice, 87.6% inhibition at 10 mg/kg, 
po) and no inhibitory activity for major CYPs, including CYP3A4. This compound 
also showed good bioavailability in mice and rats and significant efficacy in a 
rat adjuvant-induced arthritis model. Compound 8h was selected as a clinical 
candidate and is now under clinical investigation for the treatment of RA.
