Kringle 5 (K5), a proteolytic fragment of plasminogen, has been proved to be an 
angiogenic inhibitor. Previously, we have evaluated the effect of K5 on the 
vascular leakage and neovascularization in a rat model of oxygen-induced 
retinopathy. In this study, we expressed K5 and a deletion mutant of K5 (K5 
mutant) in a prokaryocyte expression system and purified them by affinity 
chromatography. K5 mutant was generated by deleting 11 amino acids from K5 while 
retaining the three disulfide bonds. The anti-angiogenic activity of intact K5 
and K5 mutant were compared in endothelial cells and retinal neovascularization 
rat model. K5 mutant inhibited the proliferation of primary human retinal 
capillary endothelial cells (HRCEC) in a concentration-dependent manner, with an 
apparent EC50 of approximate 35 nmol/L, which is twofold more potent than intact 
K5. In the even higher concentration range, K5 mutant did not inhibit pericytes 
from the same origin of HRCEC, which suggested an endothelial cell-specific 
inhibition. K5 mutant had no effect on normal liver cells and Bel7402 hepatoma 
cells even at high concentration range either. Intravitreal injection of the K5 
and mutant in the oxygen-induced retinopathy rat model both resulted in 
significantly fewer neovascular tufts and nonperfusion area than controls with 
PBS injection, as shown by fluorescein angiography. Furthermore, K5 mutant 
exhibited more strong inhibition effect on neovascularization than intact K5 by 
quantification of vascular cells. These results suggest that this K5 deletion 
mutant is a more potent angiogenic inhibitor than intact K5 and may have 
therapeutic potential in the treatment of those disorders with 
neovascularization, such as solid tumor, diabetic retinopathy, age-related 
macular degeneration, rheumatoid arthritis, and hyperplasia of prostate.
