NKT cells emerge as important regulatory cells in autoimmune responses. 
Abnormalities in the numbers and functions of natural killer T (NKT) cells have 
been observed in patients with autoimmune diseases as well as in a variety of 
mouse strains that are genetically predisposed for development of autoimmune 
diseases. Unlike conventional T cells that recognize peptides in association 
with major histocompatibility complex (MHC), NKT cells recognize glycolipid 
antigens presented by the non-polymorphic MHC class I-like protein, CD1d. 
Recently, we and other groups have demonstrated that administration of 
glycolipid ligands such as alpha-galactosylceramide (alpha-GC ) or its 
sphingosine truncated derivative, OCH suppressed autoimmune diseases such as 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), diabetes in NOD mice and 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) by inducing T helper (Th) 2 bias of autoimmune 
T cells. OCH is a unique ligand to stimulate NKT cells to selectively produce 
Th2 cytokines whereas alpha-GC induces both interleukin (IL)-4 and interferon 
(IFN)-gamma, and is more beneficial for treatment of a wide variety of 
Th1-mediated autoimmune diseases. The lack of polymorphism of CD1d and 
cross-reactive responses of mouse and human NKT cells to the same ligand 
indicates that targeting NKT cells with this ligand may be an attractive means 
for intervening in human autoimmune diseases such as type I diabetes (T1D), 
multiple sclerosis (MS) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The present review will 
focus on the potential roles of NKT cells in the pathogenesis of autoimmune 
diseases and the recent advances in glycolipid therapy for autoimmune disease 
models. The molecular mechanism of OCH-induced Th2-selective cytokine secretion 
will also be discussed.
