OBJECTIVE: Erosion of cartilage and bone is a hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). This study was undertaken to explore the roles of hyperproliferating 
synovial fibroblasts and macrophages in abnormal osteoclast formation, using the 
recently described BXD2 mouse model of RA.
METHODS: Cell distribution in the joints was analyzed by immunohistochemistry, 
using tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining to identify 
osteoclasts. To identify the defective cells in BXD2 mice, mouse synovial 
fibroblasts (MSFs) were cultured with bone marrow-derived macrophages. 
Osteoclast formation was assayed by TRAP staining and bone resorption pit assay, 
and the cytokine profiles of the MSFs and macrophages were determined by 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay.
RESULTS: In BXD2 mice, TRAP-positive osteoclasts were found at sites of active 
bone erosion, in close proximity to hyperproliferating synovial fibroblasts. On 
coculture, MSFs from BXD2 mice, but not C57BL/6 mice, produced high levels of 
RANKL messenger RNA, induced macrophages to form osteoclasts, and actively 
eroded bone slices, through a mechanism(s) that could be blocked by pretreatment 
with osteoprotegerin. Although macrophages from BXD2 mice expressed higher basal 
levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), 
and IL-6 than those from C57BL/6 mice, abnormal osteoclast formation was not due 
to enhanced sensitivity of the BXD2 mouse macrophages to RANKL. TNFalpha, 
produced by both BXD2 MSFs and BXD2 mouse macrophages, had a strong stimulatory 
effect on RANKL expression.
CONCLUSION: BXD2 MSFs produce RANKL and induce the development of osteoclasts 
from macrophages. The enhanced production of RANKL is possibly due to autocrine 
stimulation, together with paracrine stimulation by factors produced by 
macrophages.
