Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) exert anti-inflammatory, 
analgesic, and antipyretic activities and suppress prostaglandin synthesis by 
inhibiting cyclooxygenase, an enzyme that catalyzes the formation of 
prostaglandin precursors from arachidonic acid. Epidemiological observations 
indicate that the long-term treatment of patients suffering from rheumatoid 
arthritis with NSAIDs results in reduced risk and delayed onset of Alzheimer's 
disease. In this study, we investigated the therapeutic potential for 
Alzheimer's disease of mefenamic acid, a commonly used NSAID that is a 
cyclooxygenase-1 and 2 inhibitor with only moderate anti-inflammatory 
properties. We found that mefenamic acid attenuates the neurotoxicities induced 
by amyloid beta peptide (Abeta)(1-42) treatment and the expression of a Swedish 
double mutation (KM595/596NL) of amyloid precursor protein (Swe-APP) or the 
C-terminal fragments of APP (APP-CTs) in neuronal cells. We also show that 
mefenamic acid decreases the production of the free radical nitric oxide and 
reduces cytochrome c release from mitochondria induced by Abeta(1-42), Swe-APP, 
or APP-CTs in neuronal cells. In addition, mefenamic acid up-regulates 
expression of the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-X(L). Moreover, our study 
demonstrates for the first time that mefenamic acid improves learning and memory 
impairment in an Abeta(1-42)-infused Alzheimer's disease rat model. Taking these 
in vitro and in vivo results together, our study suggests that mefenamic acid 
could be used as a therapeutic agent in Alzheimer's disease.
