Elevated levels of CHI3L1 (chitinase-3-like protein 1) are associated with 
disorders exhibiting increased connective tissue turnover, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis, osteoarthritis, scleroderma, and cirrhosis of the liver. This 
secreted protein is not synthesized in young healthy cartilage, but is produced 
in cartilage from old donors or patients with osteoarthritis. The molecular 
processes governing the induction of CHI3L1 are currently unknown. To elucidate 
the molecular events involved in CHI3L1 synthesis, we investigated two models of 
articular chondrocytes: neonatal rat chondrocytes, which do not express CHI3L1, 
and human chondrocytes, which express CHI3L1 constitutively. In neonatal rat 
chondrocytes, the inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) 
and interleukin-1 potently induced steady-state levels of CHI3L1 mRNA and 
protein secretion. Treatment of chondrocytes with TNF-alpha for as little as 1 h 
was sufficient for sustained induction up to 72 h afterward. Using inhibitors 
selective for the major signaling pathways implicated in mediating the effects 
of TNF-alpha and interleukin-1, only inhibition of NF-kappaB activation was 
effective in curtailing cytokine-induced expression, including after removal of 
the cytokine, indicating that induction and continued production of CHI3L1 are 
controlled mainly by this transcription factor. Inhibition of NF-kappaB 
signaling also abolished constitutive expression by human chondrocytes. Thus, 
induction and continued secretion of CHI3L1 in chondrocytes require sustained 
activation of NF-kappaB. Selective induction of CHI3L1 by cytokines acting 
through NF-kappaB coupled with the known restriction of the catabolic responses 
by CHI3L1 in response to these inflammatory cytokines represents a key 
regulatory feedback process in controlling connective tissue turnover.
