Surgical synovectomy to remove the inflammatory synovium can temporarily 
ameliorate rheumatoid inflammation and delay the progress of joint destruction. 
An efficient medically induced programmed cell death (apoptosis) in the 
rheumatoid synovium might play a role similar to synovectomy but without 
surgical tissue damage. Gene transfer of Fas ligand (FasL) has increased the 
frequency of apoptotic cells in mouse and rabbit arthritic synovium. In this 
study, we investigated whether repeated FasL gene transfer could remove human 
inflammatory synovial tissue in situ and function as a molecular synovectomy. 
Briefly, specimens of human synovium from joint replacement surgeries and 
synovectomies of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients were grafted subcutaneously 
into male C.B-17 severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice. Injections of a 
recombinant FasL adenovirus (Ad-FasL) into the grafted synovial tissue at the 
dosage of 10(11) particles per mouse were performed every two weeks. Three days 
after the fifth virus injection, the mice were euthanized by CO2 inhalation and 
the human synovial tissues were collected, weighed and further examined. 
Compared to the control adenovirus-LacZ (Ad-LacZ) and phosphate buffered saline 
(PBS) injected RA synovium, the Ad-FasL injected RA synovium was dramatically 
reduced in size and weight (P < 0.005). The number of both synoviocytes & 
mononuclear cells was significantly reduced. Interestingly, an approximate 
15-fold increased frequency of apoptotic cells was observed in RA synovium three 
days after Ad-FasL injection, compared with control tissues. In summary, our in 
vivo investigation of gene transfer to human synovium in SCID mice suggests that 
repeated intra-articular gene transfer of an apoptosis inducer, such as FasL, 
may function as a 'gene scalpel' for molecular synovectomy to arrest 
inflammatory synovium at an early stage of RA.
