Bone loss is a typical pathological feature of chronic inflammatory bone 
diseases including rheumatoid arthritis, in which CD4 effector T cells play 
critical roles. We found that activated mouse Th2 and not Th1 cells produced the 
parathyroid hormone (PTH). Unlike in the parathyroid cells, PTH expression in 
Th2 cells was not regulated by the fluctuation of calcium level, but rather it 
required the full activation of the T cells. Although PTH was expressed in 
immature Th2 cells, and its receptor was transiently expressed during Th1 and 
Th2 cell differentiation, PTH did not significantly affect the outcome of the 
differentiation. In primary osteoblasts cultured in Th2 cell condition medium, 
the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was maintained at a basal level. 
However, antagonizing PTH in the condition medium resulted in a significant 
reduction of the ALP activity. These results demonstrated an important role of 
the Th2 cell-derived PTH in maintaining the bone-forming activity of the 
osteoblasts under inflammatory conditions. In osteoblasts cultured in the Th1 
cell condition medium, the ALP activity was significantly suppressed. 
Neutralizing IFN-gamma alleviated the suppression. Conversely, treatment of 
osteoblasts with IFN-gamma suppressed the ALP activity. Unlike ALP, expression 
of the major bone matrix proteins by the osteoblasts was only minimally affected 
by either Th1 or Th2 cytokine environment. In addition, the Th2 cytokine 
environment also regulated to expression of receptor activator of NF-kappaB 
ligand and osteoprotegerin through both PTH-dependent and -independent 
mechanisms. Our study therefore identified new regulatory events in bone 
remodeling under inflammatory conditions.
