Bone eburnation is a common anatomical trace of chronic arthropathy. However, 
its topographical analysis in rheumatic diseases can contribute to knowledge 
about the latter, by explaining today's diagnosis through radiology as well as 
by giving an historical perspective through paleopathology. After recalling that 
eburnated areas can also originate in infectious arthritis, the present analysis 
consists in a comparison between macroscopic and radiological observations of 
both osteoarthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) at an advanced stage. It 
focuses on the human femoral head because of its demonstrative interest. Two 
main observations emerge from our study. The eburnated surface is less extensive 
in OA (where it appears to be essentially linked to the original structure of 
the hip) and more extensive in RA at an advanced stage (where an additional 
systemic factor is predominant). The size of the associated osteophytes appears 
to be inversely proportional to the extent of the corresponding eburnated area. 
In connection with the OA-RA comparison above, the contribution of the original 
joint structure to bone eburnation was also illustrated by acromiohumeral 
eburnation in shoulder OA and by the comparison with dog hip OA. It must also be 
noted that a femoral head bone remodeling similar on the whole to that of OA can 
occur in ochronotic arthropathies whose causal chondropathy is due to a genetic 
defect. Originating in an identified chondropathy, eburnation in ochronotic 
arthropathy gives us the opportunity to study an OA-type bone remodeling per se 
as in an experiment supplied by nature and involving a human hip. However, since 
RA and ochronotic arthropathy are due to a diffuse chondropathy, both may create 
a similar macroscopic (and thus radiological) eburnation topography.
