OBJECTIVE: K/BxN-transgenic mice are a model of autoimmune arthritis, similar to 
rheumatoid arthritis. This study was undertaken to determine whether inhibition 
of lymphopenia-provoked homeostatic expansion can prevent spontaneous 
development of disease in the K/BxN model.
METHODS: To inhibit homeostatic expansion of autoreactive T cells, K/BxN mice 
with disease in the preclinical stage were adoptively transferred with CD4+ T 
cells purified from nontransgenic BxN or Thy1.1+ BxN mice. To observe the 
profile of proliferation of CD4+ T cells derived from the hosts, 
carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester-labeled autologous CD4+ T cells 
were cotransferred to K/BxN mice together with BxN CD4+ T cells. Disease onset 
and progression were scored, and the dynamics and phenotypes of recipient CD4+ T 
cells were determined by flow cytometry, before and after cell infusion.
RESULTS: During the preclinical phase of disease, K/BxN mice exhibited CD4+ T 
lymphopenia, which was followed by a compensatory expansion of these cells 
during the early clinical phase. The majority of CD4+ T cells acquired a memory 
phenotype (CD44(high),CD62L(low),CD25-), which is a hallmark of homeostatically 
expanding cells. Importantly, K/BxN mice subjected to syngeneic T cell transfer 
did not develop symptoms of arthritis and also possessed fewer transgenic T cell 
receptor-encoded Vbeta6+,CD4+ T cells. This effect was associated with decreased 
proliferation of recipient-derived CD4+ T cells but not with the function of 
CD25+ T regulatory cells present in donor cells.
CONCLUSION: These results provide the first evidence that lymphopenia-associated 
homeostatic proliferation of autoreactive CD4+ T cells potentiates autoimmune 
arthritis, and that inhibition of this process protects mice from the 
development of this pathologic condition.
