OBJECTIVE: Type II collagen (CII) is a candidate autoantigen implicated in the 
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Posttranslational glycosylation of 
CII could alter intracellular antigen processing, leading to the development of 
autoimmune T cell responses. To address this possibility, we studied the 
intracellular processing of CII for presentation of the arthritogenic 
glycosylated epitope CII(259-273) to CD4 T cells in macrophages from 
HLA-DR1-transgenic mice.
METHODS: HLA-DR1-transgenic mice were generated on a class II major 
histocompatibility complex-deficient background, and T cell hybridomas specific 
for the glycosylated and nonglycosylated epitope CII(259-273) were developed. 
Subcellular fractionation of macrophages was used to localize CII degradation to 
particular compartments and to identify the catalytic subtype of proteinases 
involved.
RESULTS: We showed that the glycosylated CII(259-273) epitope required more 
extensive processing than did the nonglycosylated form of the same epitope. 
Dense fractions containing lysosomes were primarily engaged in the processing of 
CII for antigen presentation, since these compartments contained 1) enzyme 
activity that generated antigenic CII fragments bearing the arthritogenic 
glycosylated epitope, 2) the antigenic CII fragments themselves, 3) CII 
peptide-receptive HLA-DR1 molecules, and 4) peptide/HLA-DR1 complexes that could 
directly activate T cell hybridomas. Degradation of CII by dense fractions 
occurred optimally at pH 4.5 and was abrogated by inhibitors of serine and 
cysteine proteinases.
CONCLUSION: Processing of the arthritogenic glycosylated CII(259-273) epitope, 
which is implicated in the induction of autoimmune arthritis, is more 
stringently regulated than is processing of the nonglycosylated form of the same 
epitope. Mechanisms of intracellular processing of the glycosylated epitope may 
constitute novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of RA.
