BACKGROUND/AIM: Experimental in vitro and in vivo investigations in a mouse 
model have proved that TNF-alpha, IL12, IL-15 and IL18 participate in the 
pathogenesis of erosive inflammatory arthritis. The aim of this research was to 
determine the clinical significance of cytokines in the evaluation of the 
activity of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Inside a 4-year period we followed-up 64 patients with RA as newly 
ocurred or in the phase of worsening. We observed the clinical manifestation of 
the disease upon which we divided the patients in to 3 groups: the patients with 
low active RA, patients with moderate active RA, and the patients with wild 
active RA. The control group (n=25 patients) included the patients with 
osteoarthrosis (OA), and arthritis of the knee. In the samples of serum of all 
of the patients the concentratin of cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-12, IL-15, and IL-18 
were determined using the immunoenzymatic methods in mice for human 
interleukines. By comparing the concentrations in 30 patients with the high, 14 
patiens with moderate, and 20 patiens with the mild activity of RA it was 
determined that the patients with the high degree of the disease activity, had 
significantly high (p < 0.01; p < 0.05) concentrations of the examined cytokines 
in blood and synovial fluid as compared to the patients with the moderate and 
mild active disease. There was a relationship (p < 0.01) between the 
concentrations of cytokines in blood and synovial fluid with the quantity of the 
Disease Activity Score in 28 joints.
CONCLUSIONS: Cytokines concentrations could be good indicators of the degree of 
the general activity of RA. This research could contribute to the interpretation 
of insufficiently well known views of the pathogenesis role and significance of 
citokines in an active disease.
