Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways are implicated in joint 
destruction in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by modulating the production and 
functions of inflammatory cytokines. Although p38 MAPK (p38) participates in 
signaling cascades leading to osteolysis in arthritis, the mechanisms of its 
action in this process remain incompletely understood. Here, we found that the 
osteoclast (Ocl) precursors expressed p38alpha, but not p38beta, p38delta, and 
p38gamma isoforms. Treatment of these cells with receptor activator of nuclear 
factor (NF)-kappaB ligand (RANKL) resulted in p38 activation. Importantly, Ocl 
development induced by RANKL or RANKL and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha was 
blocked with the novel p38 inhibitor 
4-(3-(4-chlorophenyl)-5-(1-methylpiperidin-4-yl)-1H-pyrazol-4-yl)pyrimidine 
(SC-409). To validate in vitro data, p38 role was further investigated in 
streptococcal cell wall (SCW)-induced arthritis in rats. We found that 
SCW-induced joint swelling and bone destruction were attenuated by SC-409. 
Mechanistically, the data show that SCW-stimulated DNA binding activity of the 
transcription factor myocyte-enhancing factor 2 C, which is downstream of p38, 
was inhibited by SC-409. In addition, SC-409 inhibited SCW-stimulated expression 
of numerous factors, including TNF-alpha, interleukin-1beta, and RANKL. Although 
c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase and NF-kappaB pathways were activated in vitro by 
RANKL and in vivo by SCW, SC-409 had no significant effect on these pathways. In 
conclusion, our data show that p38 modulates the production and signaling of 
cytokines, thus providing a mechanism of the bone-sparing effect of SC-409 in 
rat arthritis. These data present SC-409 as a novel potent p38 inhibitor and 
suggest that p38-based therapies may be beneficial in preventing bone loss 
associated with RA.
