Thioredoxin reductase (TrxR) reduces thioredoxin (Trx), thereby contributing to 
cellular redox balance, facilitating the synthesis of deoxy-ribose sugars for 
DNA synthesis, and regulating redox-sensitive gene expression. Auranofin is a 
gold compound that potently inhibits TrxR. This inhibition is one suspected 
mechanism of auranofin's therapeutic benefit in the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis. The use of other gold compounds to treat cancer or inflammatory 
disease may rely on their ability to inhibit TrxR. In the current study, we 
tested the hypothesis that a variety of gold compounds may inhibit TrxR.
METHODS: We exposed rat-TrxR1 to auranofin, gold sodium thiomalate, sodium 
aurothiosulfate, triphenyl phosphine gold chloride, or gold acetate, and 
measured TrxR activity ex vivo. We then compared TrxR1 inhibitory levels of gold 
compounds to those that inhibited mitochondrial activity of THP1 monocytes and 
OSC2 epithelial cells, estimated by succinate dehydrogenase activity.
RESULTS: All gold compounds inhibited TrxR1 at concentrations ranging from 5 to 
4000 nM (50% inhibitory concentration). The oxidation state of gold did not 
correlate with inhibitory potency, but ligand configuration was important. 
Au(I)-phosphine compounds (triphenyl phosphine gold chloride and auranofin) were 
the most potent inhibitors of TrxR. All TrxR1 inhibitory concentrations were 
sublethal to mitochondrial activity in both THP1 and OSC2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Diverse types of gold compounds may be effective inhibitors of 
TrxR1 at concentrations that do not suppress cellular mitochondrial function. 
Inhibition may be optimized to some degree by altering the ligand configuration 
of the compounds. These results support future study of a variety of Au 
compounds for therapeutic development as inhibitors of TrxR1.
