The effectiveness of etanercept [tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) 
blocker] and corticoids in treating immuno-mediated inner ear disease (IMIED) 
was compared in an animal model of autoimmune labyrinthitis. IMIED is one of the 
few forms of sensorineural hearing loss that is reversible with proper medical 
treatment. While the effectiveness and usefulness of immunomodulating agents 
(corticosteroids) in treating IMIED have been demonstrated, TNFalpha 
antagonists, which inhibit granuloma formation in rheumatoid arthritis and other 
autoimmune diseases, have been considered as an alternative therapy. The 
efficacy of etanercept (anti-TNFalpha) was evaluated in a guinea pig model of 
experimental autoimmune labyrinthitis in which 25 guinea pigs were divided in a 
control group, which was used to document the rise in hearing thresholds 
following immunisation, and two experimental groups, which were treated with 
steroids (6-methylprednisolone) and anti-TNFalpha (etanercept), respectively, 
after the immunisation. Comparison of the auditory thresholds obtained by means 
of auditory brainstem response (ABR) revealed that the auditory thresholds of 
the two experimental groups were not statistically different 
(6-methylprednisolone: 41.5 dB, SD: 8.51; etanercept: 37.5 dB, SD: 7.91) and 
that both compared favourably with that of the control group (60 dB, SD: 7.91) 
at p=0.001. We therefore conclude that etanercept is as effective as 
glucocorticoids in an animal model of autoimmune labyrinthitis; however, the 
potential adverse effects and high price of the former advise against its use as 
an initial therapy for IMIED.
