Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a human systemic autoimmune disease with a 
prevalence of about 1%. Although an important role for B cells has been 
demonstrated in animal models of autoimmune, inflammatory arthritis, the 
importance of B cells in RA has been controversial for decades. The development 
of therapies targeting B cells may help to resolve this debate. Rituximab, a 
mouse-human chimeric monoclonal antibody against the B cell-specific antigen 
CD20, was the first B cell-targeted therapy tested in double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trials for RA. On the basis of the data from three separate 
trials, addition of rituximab to methotrexate appears to reduce significantly 
the signs and symptoms of rheumatoid factor-seropositive RA, as assessed by 
American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 20, 50 and 70 response criteria, and to 
be relatively safe. Significant questions about rituximab therapy still need to 
be addressed, including whether or not treatment with rituximab reduces 
radiographic progression of joint damage, the safety and efficacy of repeated 
courses of rituximab, and the long-term effects of rituximab on the immune 
system. Preliminary data on treatment of RA with belimumab, a fully human 
monoclonal antibody against B lymphocyte stimulator (a growth and survival 
factor for B cells) is now available. In a double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
phase II trial, belimumab was well tolerated and had a significant beneficial 
effect on the ACR 20 response. Thus, therapies specifically targeting B cells do 
appear to be effective in the treatment of RA, providing direct evidence that B 
cells are important in the pathogenesis of RA.
