Six novel members of the IL-1 family of cytokines were recently identified, 
primarily through the use of DNA database searches for IL-1 homologues, and were 
named IL-1F5 to IL-1F10. In the present study, we investigated the effect of 
IL-1F8 on primary human joint cells, and examined the expression of the new IL-1 
family members in human and mouse joints. Human synovial fibroblasts (hSFs) and 
human articular chondrocytes (hACs) expressed the IL-1F8 receptor (IL-1Rrp2) and 
produced pro-inflammatory mediators in response to recombinant IL-1F8. IL-1F8 
mRNA expression was increased in hSFs upon stimulation with proinflammatory 
cytokines, whereas in hACs IL-1F8 mRNA expression was constitutive. However, 
IL-1F8 protein was undetectable in hSF and hAC culture supernatants. 
Furthermore, although IL-1beta protein levels were increased in inflamed human 
and mouse joint tissue, IL-1F8 protein levels were not. IL-1F8 levels in 
synovial fluids were similar to or lower than those in matched serum samples, 
suggesting that the joint itself is not a major source of IL-1F8. Serum levels 
of IL-1F8 were similar in healthy donors, and patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis, osteoarthritis and septic shock, and did not correlate with 
inflammatory status. Interestingly however, we observed high IL-1F8 levels in 
several serum samples in all groups. In conclusion, IL-1F8 exerts 
proinflammatory effects in primary human joint cells. Joint and serum IL-1F8 
protein levels did not correlate with inflammation, but they were high in some 
human serum samples tested, including samples from patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. It remains to be determined whether circulating IL-1F8 can contribute 
to joint inflammation in rheumatoid arthritis.
