OBJECTIVE: To investigate endothelial function and levels of vascular oxidative 
stress in rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA), in view of mounting evidence for 
an association between rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and accelerated vascular 
disease.
METHODS: Thoracic aortic rings were prepared from AIA and control rats. After 
preconstriction by norepinephrine, the vasodilatory response to acetylcholine 
was determined. The amounts of 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) and nitrotyrosine in 
AIA rat aortas were measured by Western blotting. Homogenates of the aortas were 
incubated with various substrates for superoxide-producing enzymes, and 
superoxide production was assessed by fluorogenic oxidation of dihydroethidium 
to ethidium. Expression of endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) in aortas 
was examined by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and 
Western blotting. Serum levels of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), a critical eNOS 
cofactor, were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography.
RESULTS: Endothelium-dependent relaxation of the aortic ring was significantly 
depressed in AIA rats compared with control rats. The amounts of HNE and 
nitrotyrosine were increased in AIA rat aortas, indicating overproduction of 
reactive oxygen species. Incubation of AIA rat aorta homogenates with NADH or 
L-arginine, a substrate of eNOS, resulted in a significant increase in 
superoxide production. Endothelial NOS was highly expressed in AIA rat aortas. 
Serum levels of BH4 were significantly lower in AIA. Treatment of AIA with BH4 
reversed the endothelial dysfunction, suggesting that its deficiency may 
contribute to the uncoupling of eNOS.
CONCLUSION: Vascular dysfunction in RA can be partially modeled in animals. 
NAD(P)H oxidase and uncoupled eNOS are responsible for the increase in vascular 
oxidative stress, which is likely to be involved in the endothelial dysfunction 
in AIA.
