Experimental rat models of arthritis are extensively studied with a view to 
understand the genetic underpinnings of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Genome scans 
using these models have led to the detection of arthritis regulatory 
quantitative trait loci (QTLs) on all but three chromosomes of the rat. Whereas 
some of the QTLs are model specific, others overlap between models. Some 
arthritis susceptibility and/or severity QTLs identified by genetic linkage 
analyses are corroborated by substitution mapping using congenic strains, 
whereas others are not. In these cases, testing alternate arthritis models 
proved to be useful to identify QTL effects. Nevertheless, development and 
testing of congenic substrains containing progressively shorter introgressed 
regions have not only fine mapped the location of the arthritis QTLs but also 
resulted in the identification of multiple QTLs within several originally 
identified individual QTL. Most of these studies progressed rapidly since 2001, 
when the rat genome sequence was published. Proof of principle for substitution 
mapping as a successful method for QTL gene discovery is provided by the 
positional cloning of Ncf1 as one of the arthritis QTLs in rats. This finding is 
encouraging for similar sustained dissection of all the other arthritis QTLs 
mapped in the rat. Identification of rat arthritis QTLs is expected to pave the 
way for discovery of yet-unidentified arthritis-causative genetic elements 
and/or pathways for RA in humans and potential development of targeted 
therapeutics. This review catalogs some of the recent advances made in QTL 
discovery projects of experimentally induced rat models of arthritis.
