Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) is a key factor for 
osteoclastogenesis at the bone-pannus interface in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis as well as a receptor activator of NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL). Imatinib 
mesylate inhibits the phosphorylation of c-fms, a receptor for M-CSF. The 
present study investigates the effect of imatinib mesylate on joint destruction 
in rats with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and on osteoclastogenesis in 
vitro. Imatinib mesylate (50 or 150 mg/kg), dexamethasone, or vehicle was 
administered daily to CIA rats for 4 weeks from the onset of arthritis. Hind-paw 
swelling and body weight were measured weekly. At weeks 2 and 4, the 
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints and the ankle and subtalar joints were 
radiographically and histologically assessed. The effect of imatinib mesylate on 
osteoclast formation from rat bone marrow cells with M-CSF and soluble RANKL 
(sRANKL) in vitro was also examined. Radiographic assessment showed that 150 
mg/kg imatinib mesylate suppressed the destruction of the MTP and the ankle and 
subtalar joints at week 2, and MTP joint destruction at week 4 in CIA rats, 
although hind-paw swelling was not suppressed. The number of TRAP-positive cells 
at the bone-pannus interface was significantly reduced in the group administered 
with 150 mg/kg imatinib mesylate compared with that given vehicle at week 4. 
Imatinib mesylate dose-dependently inhibited the proliferation of 
M-CSF-dependent osteoclast precursor cells in vitro as well as osteoclast 
formation induced by M-CSF and sRANKL. These findings suggest that imatinib 
mesylate could prevent joint destruction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
