Proteoglycan (PG)-induced arthritis, a murine model of rheumatoid arthritis, is 
characterized by autoimmunity against mouse cartilage PG and chronic joint 
inflammation. L-selectin (CD62L) and CD44 are major adhesion molecules on 
leukocytes that regulate their homing to lymph nodes and entry into inflamed 
tissues. In the present study, we studied the requirement for CD44 and CD62L 
expression for mediating lymphocyte homing, thus permitting the development of 
autoimmunity vs mediating the entry of leukocytes into the joints, thus allowing 
inflammation in PG-induced arthritis. We immunized wild-type, CD44 knockout 
(KO), CD62L KO, and double (CD44/CD62L) KO BALB/c mice with PG and monitored the 
effects of gene deficiencies on PG-specific immunity, arthritis severity, 
leukocyte trafficking, and the ability of lymphocytes to adoptively transfer 
disease to syngeneic SCID mice. Single and double KO mice demonstrated reduced 
PG-specific spleen cell proliferation, but the production of Th cytokines and 
autoantibodies was comparable in KO and wild-type mice. KO leukocytes had 
reduced ability to adhere tightly to the synovial endothelium in arthritic 
joints. This diminished leukocyte adhesion correlated with the magnitude of 
granulocyte (neutrophil) influx and the severity of inflammation, which were 
both reduced in the joints of KO mice. However, transfer of spleen cells from 
mildly arthritic KO donors to SCID hosts resulted in development of severe 
arthritis. Our results indicate that CD44 and CD62L expression in the cells of 
the innate immune system (granulocytes) is important for their efficient influx 
into the joints and also suggest that granulocytes play a crucial role in 
arthritis progression.
