Recently, studies in adult rheumatoid arthritis patients have shown an 
association with four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 3.7-kb 
regulatory region of human corticotropin-releasing hormone (hCRH) gene located 
at positions -3531, -3371, -2353, and -684 bp. Three of these novel 
polymorphisms are in absolute linkage disequilibrium, resulting in three 
combined alleles, named A1B1, A2B1, and A2B2. To study whether the described 
polymorphic nucleotide sequences in the 5' region of the hCRH gene interfere 
with binding of nuclear proteins, an electric mobility shift assay (EMSA) was 
performed. At position -2353 bp, a specific DNA protein complex was detected for 
the wild-type sequence only, possibly interfering with a binding site for the 
activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6). In contrast, no difference could be 
detected for the other SNPs. However, at position -684, a quantitative 
difference in protein binding due to cAMP incubation could be observed. To 
further investigate whether these SNPs in the CRH promoter are associated with 
an altered regulation of the CRH gene, we performed a luciferase reporter gene 
assay with transiently transfected rat pheochromocytoma cells PC12. Incubation 
with 8-Br-cAMP alone or in combination with cytokines enhanced significantly the 
promoter activity in PC12 cells. The promoter haplotypes studied exhibited a 
differential capacity to modulate CRH gene expression. In all our experiments, 
haplotype A1B1 showed the most pronounced influence on promoter activity. Taken 
together, our results demonstrate a differential binding capacity of nuclear 
proteins of the promoter polymorphisms resulting in a different gene regulation. 
Most probably the SNP at position -2,353 plays a major role in mediating these 
differences.
