Abundantly expressed serum amyloid A (SAA) protein under chronic inflammatory 
conditions gives rise to insoluble aggregates of SAA derivatives in multiple 
organs resulting in reactive amyloid A (AA) amyloidosis, a consequence of 
rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn's disease, ankylosing spondylitis, familial 
Mediterranean fever, and Castleman's disease. An inflammation-responsive 
transcription factor, SAF (for SAA activating factor), has been implicated in 
the sustained expression of amyloidogenic SAA under chronic inflammatory 
conditions. However, its role in the pathogenesis of AA amyloidosis has thus far 
remained obscure. In this paper we have shown that SAF-1, a major member of the 
SAF family, is abundantly present in human AA amyloidosis patients. To assess 
whether SAF-1 is directly linked to the pathogenesis of AA amyloidosis, we have 
developed a SAF-1 transgenic mouse model. SAF-1-overexpressing mice 
spontaneously developed AA amyloidosis at the age of 14 mo or older. 
Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the nature of the amyloid deposits as an 
AA type derived from amyloidogenic SAA1. Furthermore, SAF-1 transgenic mice 
rapidly developed severe AA amyloidosis in response to azocasein injection, 
indicating increased susceptibility to inflammation. Also, during inflammation 
SAF-1 transgenic mice exhibited a prolonged acute phase response, leading to an 
extended period of SAA synthesis. Together, these results provide direct 
evidence that SAF-1 plays a key role in the development of AA amyloidosis, a 
consequence of chronic inflammation.
