Mast cells are key effectors in the pathogenesis of inflammatory and tissue 
destructive diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). These cells contain 
specialized secretory granules loaded with bioactive molecules including 
cytokines, growth factors, and proteases that are released upon activation. This 
study investigated the regulation of matrix metalloproteinase MMP-9 (gelatinase 
B) in human mast cells by cytokines that are known to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of RA. Immunohistochemical staining of synovial tissue showed 
abundant expression of MMP-9 by synovial tissue mast cells in patients with RA 
but not in normal controls. The expression, activity, and production of MMP-9 in 
mast cells was confirmed by RT-PCR, zymography, and Western blotting using cord 
blood-derived human mast cells (CB-HMC). Treatment of CB-HMC with TNF-alpha 
significantly increased the expression of MMP-9 mRNA and up-regulated the 
activity of MMP-9 in a time- and dose-dependent manner. By contrast, IFN-gamma 
inhibited MMP-9 mRNA and protein expression. The cytokine-mediated regulation of 
MMP-9 was also apparent in the human mast cell line (HMC-1) and in mouse bone 
marrow-derived mast cells. Furthermore, TNF-alpha significantly increased the 
invasiveness of CB-HMC across Matrigel-coated membranes while the addition of 
IFN-gamma, rTIMP-1, or pharmacological MMP inhibitors significantly reduced this 
process. These observations suggest that MMP-9 is not a stored product in mast 
cells but these cells are capable of producing this enzyme under inflammatory 
conditions that may facilitate the migration of mast cell progenitors to sites 
of inflammation and may also contribute to local tissue damage.
