Conversion of arginyl to citrullyl residues (citrullination) is essential for 
the formation of the epitopes recognized by rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-associated 
autoantibodies to citrullinated proteins (ACPA). ACPA are secreted by plasma 
cells of the rheumatoid synovial tissue where their major target, citrullinated 
fibrin, is abundant. Although numerous arguments suggest that ACPA play an 
important role in RA, their pathological relevance remains to be established. In 
the present study, we assessed the immunogenicity and arthritogenicity of 
complete Freund's adjuvant-emulsified autologous citrullinated (C-rFBG) or 
non-citrullinated (NC-rFBG) fibrinogen in Lewis (LEW) and Brown-Norway rats, 
which exhibit drastic differences in their susceptibility to induced autoimmune 
diseases. NC-rFBG induced no antibody response. In contrast, a single injection 
of C-rFBG induced an IgG response directed mainly to citrullinated determinants 
of rFBG. However, all rat strains remained devoid of clinical and histological 
signs of arthritis up to 3 months after C-rFBG inoculation. Next, in LEW rats, 
we tested whether autoimmunity to C-rFBG could aggravate acute ankle arthritis 
triggered by intra-articular injection of incomplete Freund's adjuvant (IFA). 
However, such arthritis evolved identically in the presence or absence of 
anti-C-rFBG autoantibodies. However, IFA-injected joints were devoid of 
citrullinated fibrin deposits. Therefore, citrullination allows breakdown of 
immunological tolerance but the autoimmune response developed is not 
spontaneously arthritogenic. Whether or not it can aggravate arthritis with 
citrullinated fibrin deposits remains to be evaluated.
