Many autoimmune conditions have close genetic linkages to particular human 
histocompatibility leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II genes. With the aim of 
establishing a murine model of autoimmune disease, we have generated an HLA 
DR4-DQ3 haplotype transgenic (Tg) mouse that expresses a 440-kb yeast artificial 
chromosome harbouring DRA, DRB1*040101, DRB4*010301, DQA1*030101, DQB1*0302 and 
all the internal regulatory segments. This Tg mouse line was crossed to human 
CD4 (hCD4) Tg mice and endogenous class II knockout mice (I-A(o/o) and I-E(o/o)) 
lines to generate a DR4-DQ3.hCD4.IAE(o/o) Tg line. The Tg DR and DQ molecules 
are expressed on the physiological cell types in these animals, i.e. on most B 
cells (>85%), dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages but not on T cells, with 
levels of expression comparable with those of human B cells (where DR > DQ 
expression). The DR4/DQ3 transgenes fully reconstituted the CD4 T-cell 
compartment, in both the thymus and the periphery, and the analysis of the 
T-cell receptor repertoire in the Tg mice confirmed that these class II 
molecules were able to mediate thymic selection of a broad range of Vbeta 
families. HLA DR4- and DQ3-restricted T-cell responses were elicited following 
immunization with known T-cell determinants presented by these molecules. 
Furthermore, the DR4-DQ3-restricted CD4(+) T cells conferred protective 
antibody-mediated immunity against an otherwise lethal infection with Salmonella 
enterica var. typhimurium. These new DR4-DQ3 Tg mice should prove to be valuable 
tools for dissecting the importance of this class II haplotype in autoimmune 
disorders like rheumatoid arthritis.
