Previously, we designed and synthesized a new NF-kappaB inhibitor, 
dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin (DHMEQ). In the present research we looked into 
the effect of DHMEQ on the activation of macrophages, especially on the 
phagocytotic activity of cells of the mouse macrophage-like cell line RAW264.7. 
DHMEQ inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced NF-kappaB activation by 
inhibiting its nuclear translocation from the cytoplasm. It also inhibited the 
expression of inducible NO synthase (iNOS) and nitric oxide (NO) production 
induced by LPS and interferon-gamma. Using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays 
(ELISAs) we showed DHMEQ to inhibit LPS-induced secretion of IL-6, IL-12, 
interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), and TNF-alpha. Furthermore, DHMEQ also inhibited 
the phagocytosis of fluorescently labeled Escherichia coli by RAW264.7 cells 
treated with LPS or IL-1beta, thus being the first evidence for the involvement 
of NF-kappaB in the regulation of phagocytosis by use of this inhibitor. 
Deletion of p65 by siRNA also inhibited the phagocytosis. DHMEQ inhibited the 
LPS-induced but not IL-1beta-induced phagocytosis of glass beads, indicating 
that activation of not only NF-kappaB but also Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4) is 
essential for the phagocytosis of E. coli. Previously we found that DHMEQ 
inhibited type 2 collagen-induced rheumatoid arthritis and the growth of various 
human carcinomas in mice. It is thus likely that inhibition of macrophage 
activation is involved in the mechanism of these anti-inflammatory and antitumor 
activities of DHMEQ in mice.
