The inhibition of prostaglandin (PG) synthesis is at the center of current 
anti-inflammatory therapies. Because cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors and 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit the formation of multiple 
PGs, there is currently a strong focus on characterizing the role of the 
different PGs in the inflammation process and development of arthritis. Evidence 
to date suggests that both PGE(2) and PGI(2) act as mediators of pain and 
inflammation. Most of the data indicating a role for PGI(2) in this context have 
been generated in animal models of acute pain. Herein, we describe the role of 
PGI(2) in models of osteoarthritis (OA) and rheumatoid arthritis using a highly 
selective PGI(2) receptor (IP, Ptgir) antagonist and IP receptor-deficient mice. 
In the rat OA model using monoiodoacetate injection into the knee joint, the IP 
antagonist reduced pain with an efficacy approaching that of the NSAID 
diclofenac. In a chronic model of inflammatory arthritis, collagen-antibody 
induced arthritis model in mice, IP receptor-deficient mice displayed a 91% 
reduction in arthritis score. Interestingly, pretreatment with the IP 
[N-[4-(imidazolidin-2-ylideneamino)-benzyl]-4-methoxy-benzamide] antagonist in 
this model also caused a significant reduction of the symptoms, whereas 
administration of the compound after the initiation of arthritis had no 
detectable effect. Our data indicate that, in addition to its role in acute 
inflammation, PGI(2) is involved in the development of chronic inflammation. The 
results also suggest that the inhibition of PGI(2) synthesis by NSAIDs and COX-2 
inhibitors, in addition to that of PGE(2), contributes to their efficacy in 
treating the signs of arthritis.
