ECF-L is a novel autocrine stimulator of osteoclast (OCL) formation that 
enhances the effects of 1,25-(OH)2D3 and RANK ligand (RANKL) and is increased in 
inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis. ECF-L acts at the later 
stages of OCL formation and does not increase RANKL expression. Thus, its 
mechanism of action is unclear. Therefore, RAW 264.7 cells and M-CSF-dependent 
murine bone marrow macrophage (MDBM) cells were treated with RANKL and/or with 
recombinant ECF-L expressed as a Fc fusion protein (ECF-L-Fc) to determine their 
effects on NF-kappaB, AP-1 and JNK activity, and on the expression of the 
adhesion molecules that have been implicated in OCL formation. These parameters 
were measured by semiquantitative and PCR and Western blot analysis. In 
addition, the role of ICAM-1 was further assessed by treating normal mouse 
marrow cultures with ECF-L-Fc and 10(-10) M 1,25-(OH)2D3 in the presence or 
absence of a blocking ICAM-1 antibody or treating marrow cultures from ICAM-1 
knockout mice with ECF-L and 1,25-(OH)2D3. ECF-L-Fc by itself only modestly 
increased NF-kappaB binding and JNK activity in RAW 264.7 cells, which was 
further enhanced by RANKL. In contrast, ECF-L-Fc increased LFA-1alpha and ICAM-1 
mRNA levels 1.8-fold in mouse marrow cultures, and anti-ICAM-1 almost completely 
inhibited OCL formation induced by 10(-10) M 1,25-(OH)2D3 and ECF-L. 
Furthermore, ECF-L did not increase OCL formation in marrow cultures from ICAM-1 
knockout mice. Taken together, these results demonstrate that ECF-L enhances 
RANKL and 1,25-(OH)2D3-induced OCL formation by increasing adhesive interactions 
between OCL precursors through increased expression of ICAM-1 and LFA-1.
