OBJECTIVE: The IKK complex regulates NF-kappaB activation, an important pathway 
implicated in the rheumatoid arthritis (RA) disease process. This study was 
undertaken to assess the efficacy of 
N-(6-chloro-7-methoxy-9H-beta-carbolin-8-yl)-2-methylnicotinamide (ML120B), a 
potent and selective small molecule inhibitor of IKKbeta.
METHODS: Polyarthritis was induced in rats by injection of Freund's complete 
adjuvant into the hind footpad. ML120B was administered orally twice daily, 
either prophylactically or therapeutically. Paw volumes and body weights were 
measured every 2-3 days throughout the study. We assessed bone erosions by 
several methods: histologic evaluation, quantitative micro-computed tomography 
(micro-CT) imaging analysis, and measurement of type I collagen fragments in the 
serum. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to evaluate expression of 
messenger RNA for genes related to inflammation and to bone and cartilage 
integrity.
RESULTS: Oral administration of ML120B inhibited paw swelling in a 
dose-dependent manner (median effective dosage 12 mg/kg twice daily) and offered 
significant protection against arthritis-induced weight loss as well as 
cartilage and bone erosion. We were able to directly demonstrate that NF-kappaB 
activity in arthritic joints was reduced after ML120B administration. Also, we 
observed that down-regulation of the NF-kappaB pathway via IKKbeta inhibition 
dampened the chronic inflammatory process associated with rat adjuvant-induced 
arthritis.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study suggest that IKKbeta inhibition is 
an effective therapeutic approach to treat both the inflammation and the 
bone/cartilage destruction observed in RA. Methods for the determination of 
serum markers for bone and cartilage destruction, as well as micro-CT analysis, 
may aid in predicting and evaluating the therapeutic efficacy of IKKbeta 
inhibition therapy in humans.
