Many autoimmune diseases are believed to involve primarily T cell-mediated 
effector mechanisms. There is increasing realization, however, that Abs may also 
play a vital role in the propagation of T cell-driven disorders. In this study, 
on the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA) model of human rheumatoid arthritis, 
we examined the characteristics of serum Ab response to mycobacterial heat shock 
protein (hsp) 65 (Bhsp65), self (rat) hsp65 (Rhsp65), and linear peptides 
spanning these two molecules. The AA-resistant WKY (RT.1(l)) rat responded to 
the heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis immunization with a rapid burst of 
Abs to both Bhsp65 and Rhsp65. These Abs reacted with numerous peptide epitopes; 
however, this response was reduced to a few epitopes with time. On the contrary, 
the susceptible Lewis (RT.1(l)) rat developed a relatively lower Ab response to 
Bhsp65, and Abs to Rhsp65 did not appear until the recovery from the disease. 
The Ab response in Lewis rats diversified with progression of AA, and there was 
an intriguing overlap between the repertoire of Bhsp65-reactive B and T cells 
during the recovery phase of AA. Nonetheless, subsets of the repertoire of the 
late Abs in both rat strains became focused on the same epitope regions of 
Bhsp65 and Rhsp65. The functional relevance of these Abs was evident from the 
results showing that sera from recovery phase Lewis or WKY rats, but not that of 
naive rats, afforded protection against subsequent AA. These results are of 
significance in further understanding of the role of humoral immunity in the 
pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis.
