The overgrowth of synovial tissues is critical in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). The expression of Synoviolin (SYN), an E3 ubiquitin ligase, is 
upregulated in arthritic synovial fibroblasts and is involved in the overgrowth 
of synovial cells during RA. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in the 
elevated SYN expression are not known. Here, we found that SYN expression is 
elevated in the synovial fibroblasts from mice with collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA). The proinflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1beta and tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) induce SYN expression in mouse synovial fibroblasts. 
Cultivation of mouse synovial fibroblasts with IL-1beta activates 
mitogen-activated protein kinases, including extra-cellular signal-regulated 
kinase (Erk), JNK (c-Jun N-terminal kinase), and p38, while only Erk-specific 
inhibitor blocks IL-1beta-induced SYN expression. Expression of transcription 
factor ETS1 further enhances IL-1beta-induced SYN expression. The dominant 
negative ETS1 mutant lacking the transcription activation domain inhibits SYN 
expression in a dose-dependent manner. The activation of both Erk1/2 and ETS1 is 
increased in the CIA synovial fibroblasts. Inhibition of Erk activation reduces 
ETS1 phosphorylation and SYN expression. Our data indicate that the 
proinflammatory cytokines IL-1beta and TNF-alpha induce the overgrowth of 
synovial cells by upregulating SYN expression via the Erk1/-ETS1 pathway. These 
molecules or pathways could therefore be potential targets for the treatment of 
RA.
