Flavonoids have beneficial activities which modulate oxidative stress, allergy, 
tumor growth and viral infection, and which stimulate apoptosis of tumor cells. 
In addition to these activities, dietary flavonoids are able to regulate acute 
and chronic inflammatory responses. Here we describe new aspects of regulatory 
mechanisms by which flavonoids suppress production of tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) by macrophages, microglial cells and mast cells 
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and others via toll-like receptors 
(TLRs), and TNF-alpha-mediated acute and chronic inflammatory responses. 
Treatment with flavonoids such as luteolin, apigenin, quercetin, genistein, 
(-)-epigallocatechin gallate, and anthocyanidin resulted in significant 
downregulation of LPS-elicited TNF-alpha and nitric oxide (NO) production and 
diminished lethal shock. In chronic diseases, pathogenesis of collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis which is triggered by 
TNF-alpha, was improved by the oral administration of flavonoids after the onset 
of CIA. Here, we discuss that inhibitory effects of flavonoids on acute and 
chronic inflammation are due to regulation of signaling pathways, including the 
nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation and mitogen-activated protein (MAP) 
kinase family phosphorylation. FcetaRI expression by NF-kappaB activation was 
also reduced by flavonoids; while accumulation of lipid rafts, which is the 
critical step for signaling, was blocked by flavonoids. The intake of dietary 
flavonoids reduces acute and chronic inflammation due to blocking receptor 
accumulation and signaling cascades, and would assist individuals at high-risk 
from life-style related diseases.
