Glucocorticoids are widely used to treat chronic inflammatory conditions 
including rheumatoid arthritis. They promote mechanisms important for normal 
resolution of inflammation, notably macrophage phagocytosis of leukocytes 
undergoing apoptosis. Prereceptor metabolism of glucocorticoids by 
11beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 (11beta-HSD1) amplifies intracellular 
levels of glucocorticoids by oxoreduction of intrinsically inert cortisone (in 
humans, 11-dehydrocorticosterone in mice) into active cortisol (corticosterone 
in mice) within cells expressing the enzyme. Recently, we have shown in a mouse 
model of acute inflammation, high expression of 11beta-HSD oxoreductase but not 
dehydrogenase activity in cells elicited rapidly in the peritoneum by a single 
thioglycollate injection. 11beta-HSD oxoreductase activity remained high in 
peritoneal cells until the inflammation resolved. In vitro, the 11beta-HSD1 
substrate, 11-dehydrocorticosterone, increased macrophage phagocytosis of 
apoptotic neutrophils to the same extent as corticosterone. This effect was 
dependent upon 11beta-HSD1: these cells solely expressed the type 1 11beta-HSD 
isozyme (not 11beta-HSD2), and carbenoxolone, an 11beta-HSD inhibitor, prevented 
the increase in phagocytosis elicited by 11-dehydrocorticosterone. Macrophages 
from 11beta-HSD1-deficient mice failed to respond to 11-dehydrocorticosterone. 
In vivo, 11beta-HSD1-deficient mice showed a delay in acquisition of macrophage 
phagocytic competence and had an increased number of free apoptotic neutrophils 
during sterile peritonitis. Importantly, in preliminary experiments, 
11beta-HSD1-deficient mice exhibited delayed resolution of inflammation in 
experimental arthritis. These findings suggest 11beta-HSD1 may be a component of 
mechanisms engaged early during the inflammatory response that promote its 
subsequent resolution.
