Some histological effects of chronic administration of chloroquine commonly used 
for prophylaxis or treatment of malaria. rheumatoid arthritis and lupus 
erythematosus on the medial geniculate body (MGB) of adult wistar rats was 
carefully studied. The rats of both sexes (n= 18), average weight of 184g were 
randomly assigned into treatment (n= 10) and control (n=7) groups. The rats in 
the treatment group received 2mg/kg body weight of chloroquine base dissolved in 
distilled water daily for fourteen days through the orogastric tube 
administration while the control rats received equal volume of distilled water 
daily through the same route. The rats were fed with rat pellets purchased from 
Topfeed Ltd. Sapele. Delta State. Nigeria and given water liberally and were 
then sacrificed on day fifteen of the experiment. The MGB were carefully 
dissected out and quickly fixed in 10% formal saline for routine histological 
study after H & E and thionin methods. The histological findings after H & E 
methods indicated that the treated sections of the MGB showed faintly reduced 
nuclei size, with the presence of many autophagic vacuoles and degenerative 
neurons when compared to the control sections. On the other hand. the thionin 
method indicated that the treated sections showed sparsely distributed neurons, 
which stain less intensely when compared with the control. The nissl substance 
in some of the neurons appeared degenerative while some hypertrophied with some 
vacuolations. These findings indicated that chronic administration of 
chloroquine has a deleterious effect on the neurons and nissl substance of the 
MGB. Chloroquine may probably have adverse effects on auditory sensibilities by 
its deleterious effects on the nerve cells and nissl substances of the MGB of 
the adult wistar rats. It is recommended that further studies aimed at 
corroborating these observations be carried out.
