OBJECTIVES: Gene therapy using cells as vectors to achieve secretion of 
therapeutic proteins may hold promise in the treatment of chronic diseases. 
Cell-based gene therapy with xenogeneic cells secreting antiinflammatory 
cytokines (IL-4, IL-13, or IL-1 receptor type II) has been found effective in 
mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), a model for human rheumatoid 
arthritis. Autologous cells engineered to produce antiinflammatory cytokines 
were also effective in the mouse CIA model. In all these experiments, the cells 
were grafted into the subcutaneous tissue of the back, resulting in systemic 
treatment. To evaluate the feasibility of cell-based gene therapy confined to 
the joints, we performed intraarticular injections of autologous cells in a 
rhesus monkey with CIA, a model more similar to human RA.
METHODS: We prepared ex vivo cultures of skin fibroblasts from the animal then 
transfected the cells with a plasmid carrying the lacZ gene. We injected these 
marker cells into metacarpophalangeal, metatarsophalangeal, and interphalangeal 
joints.
RESULTS: Kinetic evaluation of synovial tissue X-gal labeling, which reflected 
reported gene expression by skin fibroblasts present within the synovium, showed 
significant labeling by transfected cells up to 6 days after intraarticular 
injection. Xenogeneic fibroblasts (Chinese hamster ovary cells) injected 
intraarticularly were also detected within synovial specimens; however, labeling 
intensity was less marked than with autologous cells. Our findings establish the 
feasibility of skin fibroblast grafting into the synovium.
CONCLUSION: This preliminary study opens the door to studies of heterotopic 
autologous transfected cells for the treatment of CIA in monkeys by direct gene 
transfer within joints.
