Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease of unknown etiology. 
Effective treatment of this disorder has been hampered by the lack of 
availability of agents that selectively target affected joint tissue. We 
developed a novel pH-sensitive drug delivery system of dexamethasone (Dex) based 
on an N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide copolymer (P-Dex) and have shown that 
the delivery system specifically accumulates in inflamed joints in an animal 
model of arthritis. We hypothesize that the arthrotropism of the delivery system 
and the local acidosis-mediated drug release provide superior therapeutic 
efficacy and potentially reduced side effects in RA treatment. The initial in 
vitro drug-release study confirmed that the Dex release is indeed dependent upon 
the environmental pH. At pH 5, 37 degrees C, the conjugate shows the highest 
level of drug release. When administered systemically in an adjuvant-induced 
arthritis rat model, P-Dex offers superior and longer-lasting anti-inflammatory 
effects compared with systemically administered free Dex. In addition, greater 
bone and cartilage preservation was observed with the P-Dex treatment compared 
with free Dex treatment. Our data indicate that the differential effect of the 
conjugate is related to its selective accumulation, potential 
macrophage-mediated retention, and pH-sensitive drug release (extracellular and 
intracellular) in arthritic joints. This newly developed drug delivery system 
provides a unique method for selective targeting of glucocorticoids to inflamed 
joints which may potentially reduce systemic side effects.
