In the last years evidence has been provided for the importance of B cells in 
the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Several studies have supported 
the concept that humoral immunity, manifested by the production of 
autoantibodies, such as rheumatoid factors (RFs), plays a significant role in 
the course of the disease. Specific targeting of autoantibody-producing B cells, 
such as RF-producing B cells, should therefore be a promising new approach in 
the treatment of RA. We used a mouse model to induce human RF responses and 
asked the question whether oral treatment with the antigen (human IgG) 
recognized by RFs could induce immune tolerance to RF responses. Balb/c mice 
were orally treated with polyvalent human IgG before and after immunization with 
insoluble immune complexes (ICs) that triggered the induction of RFs. Serum 
titers of RFs were significantly reduced after both primary and booster 
immunization when human IgG was given as a single oral dose or continuously in 
drinking water. Continuous treatment with human IgG even prevented booster 
effects on RFs when treatment started after primary immunization. Treatment with 
IgG fragments provided evidence that the observed effect of human IgG was 
mediated by the Fc part and not the Fab part of IgG. Furthermore, transfer of 
spleen cells obtained from mice after oral treatment with human IgG suppressed 
RF responses in recipient mice. These data give promising indications that oral 
human IgG might represent an alternative approach for immunosuppressive B-cell 
targeted therapies in RA.
