Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by massive synovial proliferation, 
angiogenesis, subintimal infiltration of inflammatory cells and the production 
of cytokines such as TNF-alpha and IL-6. Allograft inflammatory factor-1 (AIF-1) 
has been identified in chronic rejection of rat cardiac allografts as well as 
tissue inflammation in various autoimmune diseases. AIF-1 is thought to play an 
important role in chronic immune inflammatory processes, especially those 
involving macrophages. In the current work, we examined the expression of AIF-1 
in synovial tissues and measured AIF-1 in synovial fluid (SF) derived from 
patients with either RA or osteoarthritis (OA). We also examined the 
proliferation of synovial cells and induction of IL-6 following AIF-1 
stimulation. Immunohistochemical staining showed that AIF-1 was strongly 
expressed in infiltrating mononuclear cells and synovial fibroblasts in RA 
compared with OA. Western blot analysis and semiquantitative RT-PCR analysis 
demonstrated that synovial expression of AIF-1 in RA was significantly greater 
than the expression in OA. AIF-1 induced the proliferation of cultured synovial 
cells in a dose-dependent manner and increased the IL-6 production of synovial 
fibroblasts and PBMC. The levels of AIF-1 protein were higher in synovial fluid 
from patients with RA compared with patients with OA (p < 0.05). Furthermore, 
the concentration of AIF-1 significantly correlated with the IL-6 concentration 
(r = 0.618, p < 0.01). These findings suggest that AIF-1 is closely associated 
with the pathogenesis of RA and is a novel member of the cytokine network 
involved in the immunological processes underlying RA.
