OBJECTIVE: The rheumatoid synovium displays characteristics of Toll-like 
receptor (TLR) activation and antiviral gene expression, including production of 
RANTES and interferon-beta (IFNbeta). The mechanism of this activation in 
rheumatoid synovial tissue is unknown. This study was designed to investigate 
the role of the IKK-related kinase IKKepsilon and IFN regulatory factor 3 
(IRF-3) in the activation of antiviral genes in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Kinase assay and immunostaining were performed on synovial tissue. 
Dominant-negative (DN) IKKepsilon adenoviral infection of human fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (FLS) was followed by poly(I-C) stimulation and Western blotting. 
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction was performed on DN IKKepsilon-infected 
FLS and IKKepsilon(-/-) and IKKepsilon(+/+) mouse FLS.
RESULTS: Western blotting showed that IKKepsilon phosphorylation was 
significantly greater in RA synovium compared with osteoarthritis synovium. 
Kinase assay confirmed that IKKepsilon was activated in RA synovium, and 
immunostaining showed localization of pIKKepsilon to the intimal lining. Western 
blot analysis demonstrated that activation of IRF-3 was also increased in RA 
synovium. Poly(I-C), lipopolysaccharide, and tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(TNFalpha) activated phosphorylation of IKKepsilon and IRF-3 in FLS. DN 
IKKepsilon inhibited IRF-3 phosphorylation as well as RANTES and IFNbeta protein 
production in synoviocytes. Antiviral gene expression was also reduced in FLS 
from IKKepsilon(-/-) mice compared with IKKepsilon(+/+) mice.
CONCLUSION: Antiviral gene expression in RA, especially due to TLR ligands and 
TNFalpha, is dependent on IKKepsilon and IRF-3, and this pathway plays a key 
role in the production of type I IFNs and chemokines such as RANTES. These 
findings indicate that the IKKepsilon pathway may have potential as a 
therapeutic target in RA.
