SC-236, 
(4-[5-(4-chlorophenyl)-3-(trifluoromethyl)-1-pyrazol-1-]benzenesulfonamide; 
C(16)H(11)ClF(3)N(3)O(2)S), is a highly selective cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 
inhibitor. Recently, there have been reports that SC-236 protects against 
cartilage damage in addition to reducing inflammation and pain in 
osteoarthritis. However, the mechanism involved in the inflammatory allergic 
reaction has not been examined. Mast cells accumulation can be related to 
inflammatory conditions, including allergic rhinitis, asthma, and rheumatoid 
arthritis. The aim of the present study is to investigate the effects of SC-236 
on stem cell factor (SCF)-induced migration, morphological alteration, and 
cytokine production of rat peritoneal mast cells (RPMCs). We observed that SCF 
significantly induced the migration and morphological alteration. The ability of 
SCF to enhance migration and morphological alteration was abolished by treatment 
with SC-236. In addition, production of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, 
interleukin (IL)-1beta, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) production 
induced by SCF was significantly inhibited by treatment with SC-236. Previous 
work has demonstrated that SCF-induced migration and cytokine production of mast 
cells require p38 MAPK activation. We also showed that SC-236 suppresses the 
SCF-induced p38 MAPK activation in RPMCs. These data suggest that SC-236 
inhibits migration and cytokine production through suppression of p38 MAPK 
activation. These results provided new insight into the pharmacological actions 
of SC-236 and its potential therapeutic role in the treatment of inflammatory 
allergic diseases.
