BACKGROUND: In the context of preclinical development, we studied the potential 
of intra-articular gene delivery using a recombinant adeno-associated virus 5 
(rAAV5) encoding a chimeric human tumour necrosis factoralpha (TNFalpha) soluble 
receptor I linked to a mouse immunoglobulin heavy chain Fc portion (TNF receptor 
I; TNFRI-Ig).
METHODS: Expression was under control of a nuclear factor kappa B 
(NFkappaB)-responsive promoter and compared with a cytomegalovirus (CMV) 
promoter (rAAV5.NFkappaB-TNFRI-Ig and rAAV5.CMV-TNFRI-Ig, respectively).
RESULTS: Fibroblast-like synoviocytes transduced in vitro with 
rAAV5.NFkappaB-TNFRI-Ig were able to produce TNFRI-Ig protein in response to 
several stimuli, and this was inhibited upon treatment with a specific NFkappaB 
blocking agent. A bioassay revealed that the synthesised TNFRI-Ig was bioactive, 
showing a higher affinity for human than for rat TNFalpha. Transcription of the 
transgene and protein production were detectable in joints injected with both 
constructs. No dissemination of the vector was observed outside the joints. A 
significant reduction in paw swelling was seen in rats treated with 
rAAV5.NFkappaB-TNFRI-Ig. This clinical effect was accompanied by a decrease in 
pro-inflammatory cytokine levels and an increase in IL10 expression in the 
synovium.
CONCLUSION: These results provide evidence that intra-articular gene therapy 
using rAAV5 encoding TNFRI-Ig may be a safe and feasible approach for the 
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. The higher affinity for human TNFalpha 
suggests that in patients with rheumatoid arthritis the therapeutic effect might 
be even more pronounced than in rat adjuvant arthritis.
