Currently, 14 intact, unconjugated, monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) are approved 
for therapeutic use in the United States, and more than 100 Mabs are presently 
undergoing clinical development or regulatory review. Mabs are large molecular 
weight glycoproteins that embody structural, biochemical, and pharmacologic 
properties distinct from other biologics or chemically synthesized compounds. 
Early therapeutic Mabs were murine proteins, and clinical testing of these 
agents revealed serious immune-mediated toxicities. The side effect profile of 
murine Mab therapeutic agents restricted the clinical development of these 
agents to indications with high morbidity and/or mortality (ie, oncology, graft 
vs host rejection). Advances in genetic engineering and protein expression 
technologies resulted in the development of Mabs composed either predominately 
(ie, mouse/human chimeric, "humanized") or completely (ie, "fully human" Mabs) 
of the human amino acid sequence. The production of chimeric, humanized, and 
fully human Mabs significantly reduced the immune-mediated toxicities and 
expanded the utility for these agents in numerous therapeutic areas, 
particularly in chronic disorders requiring either long-term administration (ie, 
rheumatoid arthritis) or treatment upon the flare up of disease (Crohn's 
disease, psoriasis). This review provides an overview of the molecular, 
biochemical, and pharmacokinetic properties and clinical development history of 
Mabs and details how these factors currently affect the scope and design of 
early clinical development strategies for these drug candidates. Emphasis is 
placed on the criteria for selecting appropriate subject populations for phase I 
testing of Mabs.
