INTRODUCTION: Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) participates in many 
inflammatory processes. TNFalpha modulators show beneficial effects for the 
treatment of many diseases including rheumatoid arthritis. The purpose of this 
study was to validate a rat pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) model for 
rapid assessment of drug candidates that intended to interrupt TNFalpha 
synthesis or release.
METHODS: Rats received intravenous (IV) or oral administrations of test article 
or dose vehicle, followed by LPS challenge. Plasma levels of test article and 
TNFalpha were determined. The areas under the concentration-time curves 
(AUC(drug) and AUC(TNFalpha)) were calculated. The overall percentage of 
inhibition on TNFalpha release in vivo was calculated by comparing AUC(TNFalpha) 
of the test article treated group against that for the vehicle control group.
RESULTS: The dosing vehicles tested in this study did not increase plasma 
TNFalpha level. At IV dose of up to 100 microg/kg, LPS did not alter the 
pharmacokinetics of the compound tested. Using a selective TNFalpha converting 
enzyme (TACE) inhibitor as model compound, this PK/PD model demonstrated its 
ability to correlate plasma test article concentration with its biological 
activity of lowering the LPS-induced TNFalpha plasma levels in vivo.
DISCUSSION: A rat PK/PD model for evaluation of the effect of drug candidates on 
LPS-induced TNFalpha synthesis and/or release has been investigated. This model 
provides integrated information on pharmacokinetics and in vivo potency of the 
test articles.
