Spliceosomal small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (U-snRNPs) are frequent and 
specific targets of autoantibodies in systemic rheumatic diseases. The abundant, 
functionally related heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein complexes (hnRNPs) 
have later defined as a new target of autoantibodies, of which their 
immunochemical/immunogenic and pathogenic properties are still under 
investigation. Among hnRNP proteins, those belonging to the A/B type are 
considered as the major autoantigens targeted by antibodies in sera of patients 
suffering with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and 
mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD). By performing an extensive screening 
using rat liver 40S hnRNP antigenic material, we document here the existence of 
multiple specificities of anti-hnRNP A/B autoantibodies in sera of Greek 
patients suffering with a spectrum of systemic rheumatic diseases. This included 
patients with SLE, Sjogren's syndrome (SS), Scleroderma (SSc) and a specific 
group of patients mostly with undifferentiated disease (UD patients). In total, 
four distinct types of anti-hnRNP A/B autoantibodies have been recognized. The 
first two referred to the known anti-hnRNPA2(RA33) and anti-hnRNP A1; the latter 
appearing very rarely. The third was of the new type selectively reacting with 
hnRNP B2 and an hnRNP A3 variant, while the fourth was a rare case of anti-hnRNP 
B2 alone. In addition, a novel specificity of autoantibodies against hnRNP L 
protein was identified in association with anti-hnRNP A/B antibodies. The 
co-existence within a serum of autoantibodies having variable specificity for 
hnRNP A/B and L autoantigens was shown. Specific immunochemical features of the 
identified autoantibodies are presented and a possible mechanism of autoepitope 
spreading within protein components of hnRNP complexes is discussed.
