The formation of new blood vessels permits a supply of nutrients and oxygen to 
the proliferating synovial cells and augmented inflammatory cell mass in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Angiogenesis inhibition is not dependent on a 
down-regulated immune system. Therefore, angiogenesis is an attractive target in 
treating rheumatoid arthritis. To confirm the effect of recombinant human 
endostatin, an angiogenesis inhibitor, on inflammatory angiogenesis and to 
elucidate the related mechanisms, rat adjuvant arthritis model induced by 
Freund's complete adjuvant was used. The secondary arthritis was evaluated by 
using clinical scores and determining the volume of hind paw swelling. The 
number of new blood vessels was counted under microscope based on HE 
(hematoxylin and eosin) staining and positive immunoreactivity of factor VIII 
related antigen. factor VIII related antigen and vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) expressions in synovial tissue were determined by using 
immunohistochemistry. It was found that endostatin attenuated rat secondary paw 
swelling induced by Freund's complete adjuvant in a dose-dependent manner. 
Meanwhile, the number of new blood vessels in synovial tissue stained with HE 
was reduced after treatment with endostatin, which was proved by the positive 
immunostaining of factor VIII related antigen. Further, endostatin decreased the 
expression of VEGF in both cartilage and synovial tissue. These suggest that 
endostatin inhibiting VEGF expression contributes to the regression of rat 
adjuvant arthritis.
