OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of statins on vascular dysfunction in rat 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA).
METHODS: Fluvastatin (5 mg/kg/day) was administered orally to rats with AIA, for 
21 days after the onset of arthritis. The vasodilatory response to acetylcholine 
of aortic rings isolated from rats with AIA that were not treated or were 
treated with fluvastatin and from normal rats was determined. The amounts of 
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE) and nitrotyrosine in aortas were measured by Western 
blotting. In vitro and in situ superoxide production in aortas was evaluated 
based on fluorogenic oxidation of dihydroethidium to ethidium. Expression of 
NAD(P)H components and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) in aortas was 
examined by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and 
Western blotting. Serum levels of tetrahydrobiopterin, a critical eNOS cofactor, 
were determined by high-performance liquid chromatography.
RESULTS: Fluvastatin reversed endothelial dysfunction in AIA without affecting 
the clinical severity of arthritis or serum cholesterol concentration. 
Fluvastatin reduced the amounts of HNE and nitrotyrosine in the aorta, and the 
levels of superoxide expressed in endothelial cells and smooth muscle cells in 
the tissue, in rats with AIA. NADH- or L-arginine-induced superoxide production 
was not observed in the aortic samples from fluvastatin-treated rats with AIA. 
Fluvastatin decreased the levels of expression of messenger RNA for p22phox, a 
NAD(P)H oxidase component, in the aortas of rats with AIA, but did not affect 
the expression of eNOS. Serum levels of tetrahydrobiopterin were significantly 
reduced in rats with AIA, and were increased by administration of fluvastatin.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that fluvastatin has potent vascular 
protective effects in AIA and provide additional scientific rationale for the 
use of statins to reduce cardiovascular mortality in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis.
