OBJECTIVE: Marrow-derived endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are important in 
the neovascularization that occurs in diverse conditions such as cardiovascular 
disorders, inflammatory diseases, and neoplasms. In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 
synovial neovascularization propels disease by nourishing the inflamed and 
hyperproliferative synovium. This study was undertaken to investigate the 
hypothesis that EPCs selectively home to inflamed joint tissue and may 
perpetuate synovial neovascularization.
METHODS: In a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model, neovascularization and EPC 
accumulation in mouse ankle synovium was measured. In an antibody-induced 
arthritis model, EPC recruitment to inflamed synovium was evaluated. In a 
chimeric SCID mouse/human synovial tissue (ST) model, mice were engrafted 
subcutaneously with human ST, and EPC homing to grafts was assessed 2 days 
later. EPC adhesion to RA fibroblasts and RA ST was evaluated in vitro.
RESULTS: In mice with CIA, cells bearing EPC markers were significantly 
increased in peripheral blood and accumulated in inflamed synovial pannus. EPCs 
were 4-fold more numerous in inflamed synovium from mice with anti-type II 
collagen antibody-induced arthritis versus controls. In SCID mice, EPC homing to 
RA ST was 3-fold greater than to normal synovium. Antibody neutralization of 
vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) and its ligand component alpha4 
integrin potently inhibited EPC adhesion to RA fibroblasts and RA ST 
cryosections.
CONCLUSION: These data demonstrate the selective recruitment of EPCs to inflamed 
joint tissue. The VCAM-1/very late activation antigen 4 adhesive system 
critically mediates EPC adhesion to cultured RA fibroblasts and to RA ST 
cryosections. These findings provide evidence of a possible role of EPCs in the 
synovial neovascularization that is critical to RA pathogenesis.
