The cytokines interleukin-1 (IL-1alpha and IL-1beta) and the tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) both play a major role in the initiation and regulation 
of inflammation and immunity responses. Polymorphisms within the gene sequences 
of these cytokines IL-1 and TNF-alpha have been proposed to play an important 
role in the pathogenesis of certain diseases. Affecting nearly every organ, 
various diseases, including some cancers, are described to be associated with an 
increased level of IL-1 and TNF-alpha proteins, for example, solid tumors, 
hematologic malignancies, malignant histiocytosis, autoimmune disorders, 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, sepsis, and rheumatoid arthritis. 
Regarding genetic backgrounds and pathways, numerous canine diseases show close 
similarities to their human counterparts. As a genetic model, the dog could be 
used to unravel the genetic mechanisms, for example, in particular the 
predispositions, the development, and progression of cancer and metabolic 
diseases. The identity comparison of gene and protein sequences of different 
species could be used to elucidate the structure and function of the genes and 
proteins by identifying the evolutionary conserved regions and domains. Herein 
we analyzed in detail the mRNA and protein structures and identities of the 
present known mammalian (human, canine, murine, rat, ovine, equine, feline, 
porcine, and bovine) TNF-alpha, IL-1alpha, and IL-1beta mRNAs and proteins. 
Additionally, based on the canine genome sequence, we derived in silico the 
complete mRNA structures of the IL-1alpha and IL-1beta mRNAs.
