BACKGROUND: Bulleyaconitine A (BLA) is an active ingredient of Aconitum 
bulleyanum plants. BLA has been approved for the treatment of chronic pain and 
rheumatoid arthritis in China, but its underlying mechanism remains unclear.
METHODS: The authors examined (1) the effects of BLA on neuronal voltage-gated 
Na channels in vitro under the whole cell patch clamp configuration and (2) the 
sensory and motor functions of rat sciatic nerve after single BLA injections in 
vivo.
RESULTS: BLA at 10 microm did not affect neuronal Na currents in clonal GH3 
cells when stimulated infrequently to +50 mV. When stimulated at 2 Hz for 1,000 
pulses (+50 mV for 4 ms), BLA reduced the peak Na currents by more than 90%. 
This use-dependent reduction of Na currents by BLA reversed little after 
washing. Single injections of BLA (0.2 ml at 0.375 mm) into the rat sciatic 
notch not only blocked sensory and motor functions of the sciatic nerve but also 
induced hyperexcitability, followed by sedation, arrhythmia, and respiratory 
distress. When BLA at 0.375 mm was coinjected with 2% lidocaine (approximately 
80 mm) or epinephrine (1:100,000) to reduce drug absorption by the bloodstream, 
the sensory and motor functions of the sciatic nerve remained fully blocked for 
approximately 4 h and regressed completely after approximately 7 h, with minimal 
systemic effects.
CONCLUSIONS: BLA reduces neuronal Na currents strongly at +50 mV in a 
use-dependent manner. When coinjected with lidocaine or epinephrine, BLA elicits 
prolonged block of both motor and sensory functions in rats with minimal adverse 
effects.
