Junctional adhesion molecule-C (JAM-C) is an adhesion molecule involved in 
transendothelial migration of leukocytes. In this study, we examined JAM-C 
expression in the synovium and investigated the role of this molecule in two 
experimental mouse models of arthritis. JAM-C expression was investigated by 
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry. The 
effects of a monoclonal anti-JAM-C antibody were assessed in antigen-induced 
arthritis (AIA) and K/BxN serum transfer-induced arthritis. JAM-C was expressed 
by synovial fibroblasts in the lining layer and associated with vessels in the 
sublining layer in human and mouse arthritic synovial tissue. In human tissue, 
JAM-C expression was increased in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) as compared to 
osteoarthritis synovial samples (12.7 +/- 1.3 arbitrary units in RA versus 3.3 
+/- 1.1 in OA; p < 0.05). Treatment of mice with a monoclonal anti-JAM-C 
antibody decreased the severity of AIA. Neutrophil infiltration into inflamed 
joints was selectively reduced as compared to T-lymphocyte and macrophage 
infiltration (0.8 +/- 0.3 arbitrary units in anti-JAM-C-treated versus 2.3 +/- 
0.6 in isotype-matched control antibody-treated mice; p < 0.05). Circulating 
levels of the acute-phase protein serum amyloid A as well as antigen-specific 
and concanavalin A-induced spleen T-cell responses were significantly decreased 
in anti-JAM-C antibody-treated mice. In the serum transfer-induced arthritis 
model, treatment with the anti-JAM-C antibody delayed the onset of arthritis. 
JAM-C is highly expressed by synovial fibroblasts in RA. Treatment of mice with 
an anti-JAM-C antibody significantly reduced the severity of AIA and delayed the 
onset of serum transfer-induced arthritis, suggesting a role for JAM-C in the 
pathogenesis of arthritis.
