Antiangiogenic therapy using drugs and food components is a recognized strategy 
for the prevention of various angiogenesis-mediated disorders such as tumor 
growth, diabetic retinopathy, and rheumatoid arthritis. Our preliminary cell 
culture studies, using both bovine aortic endothelial cells and human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) on screening for food-derived antiangiogenic 
compounds, showed tocotrienol (T3), an unsaturated version of vitamin E, to be a 
potential angiogenic inhibitor. We therefore investigaged the in vivo 
antiangiogenic properties of T3 using 2 well-characterized angiogenic models 
[mouse dorsal air sac (DAS) assay and the chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane 
(CAM) assay]. In the DAS assay, the increased neovascularization (angiogenesis 
index, 4.8 +/- 0.6) in tumor cell-implanted mice was suppressed (angiogenesis 
index, 2.7 +/- 0.6) by dietary supplementation of 10 mg T3-rich oil/d 
(equivalent to 4.4 mg T3/d). In the CAM assay, T3 (500-1000 microg/egg) 
inhibited new blood vessel formation on the growing CAM and increased the 
frequency of avascular zone (36-50%). To evaluate the antiangiogenic mechanism, 
we conducted cell-culture studies and found that T3 significantly reduced 
fibroblast growth factor -induced proliferation, migration, and tube formation 
in HUVEC (P < 0.05), with delta-T3 having the highest activity. Western blot 
analysis revealed that delta-T3 suppressed the phosphorylation of 
phosophoinositide-dependent protein kinase (PDK) and Akt, and increased the 
phosphorylation of apoptosis signal-regulating kinase and p38 in fibroblast 
growth factor-treated HUVEC, indicating that the antiangiogenic effects of T3 
are associated with changes in growth factor-dependent phosphatidylinositol-3 
kinase /PDK/Akt signaling as well as induction of apoptosis in endothelial 
cells. Our findings suggest that T3 has potential as a therapeutic dietary 
supplement for preventing angiogenic disorders, and therefore future clinical 
study will be required to evaluate the efficacy and safety of T3.
