Complementary and alternative medicine products are increasingly being used for 
the treatment of autoimmune diseases. However, the mechanisms of action of these 
agents are not fully defined. Using the rat adjuvant arthritis (AA) model of 
human rheumatoid arthritis, we determined whether the ethanol extract of 
Celastrus aculeatus Merr. (Celastrus), a Chinese herb, can down-modulate the 
severity of AA, and also examined the Celastrus-induced changes in immune 
responses to the disease-related antigen mycobacterial heat-shock protein 65 
(Bhsp65). AA was induced in the Lewis (LEW; RT.1l) rat by immunization 
subcutaneously with heat-killed M. tuberculosis H37Ra (Mtb). Celastrus was fed 
to LEW rats by gavage daily, beginning either before Mtb challenge (preventive 
regimen) or after the onset of AA (therapeutic regimen). An additional group of 
rats was given methotrexate for comparison. All rats were graded regularly for 
the signs of arthritis. In parallel, the draining lymph node cells of 
Celastrus-treated rats were tested for proliferative and cytokine responses, 
whereas their sera were tested for the inflammatory mediator nitric oxide. 
Celastrus feeding suppressed both the induction as well as the progression of 
AA, and the latter effect was comparable to that of methotrexate. Celastrus 
treatment induced relative deviation of the cytokine response to 
anti-inflammatory type and enhanced the production of anti-Bhsp65 antibodies, 
which are known to be protective against AA. Celastrus feeding also reduced the 
levels of nitric oxide. On the basis of our results, we suggest further 
systematic exploration of Celastrus as an adjunct therapeutic modality for 
rheumatoid arthritis.
