OBJECTIVE: To identify susceptibility genes in a rat model of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and to determine whether the corresponding human genes are 
associated with RA.
METHODS: Genes influencing oil-induced arthritis (OIA) were position mapped by 
comparing the susceptibility of inbred DA rats with that of DA rats carrying 
alleles derived from the arthritis-resistant PVG strain in chromosomal fragments 
overlapping the quantitative trait locus Oia2. Sequencing of gene complementary 
DNA (cDNA) and analysis of gene messenger RNA (mRNA) expression were performed 
to attempt to clone a causal gene. Associations with human RA were evaluated by 
genotyping single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the corresponding human 
genes and by analyzing frequencies of alleles and haplotypes in RA patients and 
age-, sex-, and area-matched healthy control subjects.
RESULTS: Congenic DA rats were resistant to OIA when they carried PVG alleles 
for the antigen-presenting lectin-like receptor gene complex (APLEC), which 
encodes immunoregulatory C-type lectin-like receptors. Multiple differences in 
cDNA sequence and mRNA expression precluded cloning of a single causal gene. 
Five corresponding human APLEC genes were identified and targeted. The SNP 
rs1133104 in the dendritic cell immunoreceptor gene (DCIR), and a haplotype 
including that marker and 4 other SNPs in DCIR and its vicinity showed an 
indication of allelic association with susceptibility to RA in patients who were 
negative for antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP), with 
respective odds ratios of 1.27 (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 1.06-1.52; 
uncorrected P = 0.0073) and 1.37 (95% CI 1.12-1.67; uncorrected P = 0.0019). 
Results of permutation testing supported this association of the haplotype with 
RA.
CONCLUSION: Rat APLEC is associated with susceptibility to polyarthritis, and 
human APLEC and DCIR may be associated with susceptibility to anti-CCP-negative 
RA.
