T cells have a central role in the pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis, and 
several abnormalities in T cell homeostasis have been described in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). We hypothesized that T cell phenotypes, including frequencies of 
different subsets of T regulatory (Treg) cells and in vitro functional responses 
could be genetically determined. Furthermore, we considered that the genetic 
contribution would be accounted for by one of the arthritis regulatory 
quantitative trait loci (QTL), thus providing novel clues to gene mode of 
action. T cells were isolated from thymus, peripheral blood, and spleen from DA 
(arthritis-susceptible) and ACI and F344 (arthritis-resistant) strains and from 
F344.DA(Cia1), DA.F344(Cia5a), and DA.F344(Cia5d) rats congenic for arthritis 
QTL. T cell subpopulations differed significantly between DA, F344, and ACI. DA 
rats had an increased frequency of CD4(+) cells, and a reduction in CD8(+) and 
CD4(+)CD45RC(|o) Treg cells, compared with F344. The differences in CD4/CD8 and 
CD4(+)CD45RC(|o) Treg cells were accounted for by Cia5a. DA rats also had a 
reduced frequency of CD8(+)CD45RC(|o) CD25(+) Treg cells compared with F344, and 
that difference was explained by Cia5d. DA rats also had a significantly lower 
frequency of CD4(+)CD25(+) and CD8(+)CD25(+) thymocytes, and of peripheral blood 
CD8(+)CD45RC(|o) Treg cells, compared with F344 rats, and that difference was 
accounted for by the MHC. This is the first identification of arthritis severity 
QTL regulating numbers of CD4(+)CD45RC(|o) (Cia5a) and CD8(+)CD45RC(|o) CD25(+) 
(Cia5d) Treg cells. The MHC effect on CD8(+) Treg cells and CD25(+) thymocytes 
raises a novel potential explanation for its association with arthritis.
