OBJECTIVE: Degeneration of extracellular matrix of cartilage leads to the 
production of molecules capable of activating the immune system via Toll-like 
receptor 4 (TLR-4). The objective of this study was to investigate the 
involvement of TLR-4 activation in the development and progression of autoimmune 
destructive arthritis.
METHODS: A naturally occurring TLR-4 antagonist, highly purified 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Bartonella quintana, was first characterized using 
mouse macrophages and human dendritic cells (DCs). Mice with collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) and mice with spontaneous arthritis caused by interleukin-1 
receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) gene deficiency were treated with TLR-4 antagonist. 
The clinical score for joint inflammation, histologic characteristics of 
arthritis, and local expression of IL-1 in joints were evaluated after 
treatment.
RESULTS: The TLR-4 antagonist inhibited DC maturation induced by Escherichia 
coli LPS and cytokine production induced by both exogenous and endogenous TLR-4 
ligands, while having no effect on these parameters by itself. Treatment of CIA 
using TLR-4 antagonist substantially suppressed both clinical and histologic 
characteristics of arthritis without influencing the adaptive anti-type II 
collagen immunity crucial for this model. Treatment with TLR-4 antagonist 
strongly reduced IL-1beta expression in articular chondrocytes and synovial 
tissue. Furthermore, such treatment inhibited IL-1-mediated autoimmune arthritis 
in IL-1Ra(-/-) mice and protected the mice against cartilage and bone pathology.
CONCLUSION: In the present study, we demonstrate for the first time that 
inhibition of TLR-4 suppresses the severity of experimental arthritis and 
results in lower IL-1 expression in arthritic joints. Our data suggest that 
TLR-4 might be a novel target in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
