Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) plays an important role in the 
pathogenesis of such diseases as rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn's disease, 
ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis, and juvenile chronic arthritis. 
Recent years have brought improvement in the understanding of the pathogeneses 
of these diseases, resulting in the production of new groups of biological 
drugs, including, among others, anti-TNF-alpha antibodies. The use of TNF 
inhibitors has been a great advance in the treatment of patients with these 
inflammatory diseases. Infliximab and adalimumab are monoclonal antibodies that 
bind to and neutralize the activity of TNF-alpha. Infliximab is a mouse/human 
chimera that joins the variable regions of a mouse antibody to the constant 
region of human IgG1. Adalimumab is a fully human IgG1 antibody. Etanercept is a 
dimeric fusion protein that joins the human p75 TNF receptor to the Fc domain of 
human IgG1. The beneficial effects of the anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies 
infliximab and adalimumab and the soluble receptor fusion protein etanercept in 
the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, especially in patients resistant to other 
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs), are discussed. We observe 
stoppage of articular destruction during treatment with TNF-alpha inhibitors. 
Soon after the introduction of this therapy it was found that these agents have 
a propensity for stimulating the production of autoantibodies and antibodies 
against themselves. In this review, recent studies analyzing the effect of 
TNF-alpha blockade (infliximab, etanercept, and adalimumab) on the ANA, 
anti-dsDNA, and anticardiolipin antibody profiles in autoimmune diseases are 
discussed.
