Inhibition of NF-kappaB is known to be effective in reducing both inflammation 
and bone destruction in animal models of arthritis. Our previous study 
demonstrated that a small cell-permeable NF-kappaB inhibitor, 
dehydroxymethylepoxyquinomicin (DHMEQ), suppresses expression of proinflammatory 
cytokines and ameliorates mouse arthritis. It remained unclear, however, whether 
DHMEQ directly affects osteoclast precursor cells to suppress their 
differentiation to mature osteoclasts in vivo. The effect of DHMEQ on human 
osteoclastogenesis also remained elusive. In the present study, we therefore 
examined the effect of DHMEQ on osteoclastogenesis using a mouse 
collagen-induced arthritis model, and using culture systems of fibroblast-like 
synovial cells obtained from patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and of 
osteoclast precursor cells from peripheral blood of healthy volunteers. DHMEQ 
significantly suppressed formation of osteoclasts in arthritic joints, and also 
suppressed expression of NFATc1 along the inner surfaces of bone lacunae and the 
eroded bone surface, while serum levels of soluble receptor activator of 
NF-kappaB ligand (RANKL), osteoprotegerin and macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor were not affected by the treatment. DHMEQ also did not suppress 
spontaneous expression of RANKL nor of macrophage colony-stimulating factor in 
culture of fibroblast-like synovial cells obtained from patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. These results suggest that DHMEQ suppresses osteoclastogenesis in 
vivo, through downregulation of NFATc1 expression, without significantly 
affecting expression of upstream molecules of the RANKL/receptor activator of 
NF-kappaB/osteoprotegerin cascade, at least in our experimental condition. 
Furthermore, in the presence of RANKL and macrophage colony-stimulating factor, 
differentiation and activation of human osteoclasts were also suppressed by 
DHMEQ, suggesting the possibility of future application of NF-kappaB inhibitors 
to rheumatoid arthritis therapy.
