Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) has attracted much interest because of its many 
antiaging, metabolic and immune-modulating effects in rodents. Synthetic 
derivatives, such as 5-androstene-16alpha-fluoro-17-one (HE2500) and certain 
natural metabolites also provide benefit in various animal models of autoimmune 
and metabolic diseases. But, like DHEA, low potency and low oral bioavailability 
suggested limited usefulness of these compounds in humans. We hypothesized that 
HE3286, a novel 17-ethynyl derivative would be orally bioavailable, more potent, 
and chemically more useful in man than its parent compound. We found that on a 
dose/mass basis, HE3286 demonstrated up to 25% oral bioavailability in mice. In 
the DBA mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), animals receiving oral 
treatment with HE3286 (50 mg/kg), beginning at onset of disease, significantly 
decreased CIA peak scores and daily severity of arthritis scores. Benefit was 
associated with decreases in: (1) production of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-17; and 
(2) decreases in joint inflammation, erosion, and synovial proliferation as 
judged by histological analysis. HE3286 was not found to be immune suppressive 
in any of the classical models tested, including mitogen-induced proliferation, 
delayed-type hypersensitivity, or mixed lymphocyte reaction. Instead, benefit 
was associated with increases in numbers and function of CD4+CD25+FOXp3+CD127- 
regulatory T cells (T reg). To our knowledge, this is probably the first study 
to report that an orally bioavailable synthetic analogue of DHEA can ameliorate 
ongoing disease in a CIA mouse model with relevance to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
and to correlate that finding with decreases in proinflammatory cytokines and 
increases in T reg cells. Hormones targeting T reg cells hold the intriguing 
potential to treat autoimmune, infectious, and neoplastic diseases.
