OBJECTIVE: In autoimmune situations, the outcome of immune response against a 
disease-related antigen is typically viewed in terms of the balance between the 
pathogenic versus the protective subsets of antigen-reactive T cells. Using the 
rat adjuvant arthritis (AA) model of human rheumatoid arthritis (RA), we 
examined the antigen specificity and the functional attributes of the T cell 
repertoire directed against defined pathogenic versus protective epitopes of 
heat-shock protein 65 (hsp65), and determined the immunologic basis of the 
AA-protective effect of subsets of T cells primed by the pathogenic determinant.
METHODS: Lewis (RT.1l) rats were pretreated subcutaneously with the pathogenic 
epitope 177-191 of mycobacterial hsp65 (B177) in adjuvant (incomplete Freund's 
adjuvant/complete Freund's adjuvant/CpG) and then immunized with heat-killed M. 
tuberculosis H37Ra for disease induction. The antigen 
specificity/crossreactivity of the T cells primed by B177 or the AA-protective 
determinant 465-479 of the homologous rat hsp65 (R465) was tested by using 
proliferation assay, cytokine ELISA, tolerance induction, and adoptive transfer.
RESULTS: Pretreatment of Lewis rats with the arthritogenic determinant B177 
using an immunogenic rather than a tolerogenic regimen affords protection 
against AA instead of initiation or aggravation of AA. This protective effect of 
B177 is mediated in part by activation of T cells that are crossreactive with 
R465.
CONCLUSION: Downmodulation of AA by a pathogenic foreign epitope involving T 
cells crossreactive with a distant, protective self-determinant represents a 
novel aspect of immune regulation, and suggests further exploration of the use 
of pathogenic epitopes for the treatment of autoimmune arthritis.
