Major recent advances in the field of chromatin remodeling have dramatically 
changed our understanding of the ways in which genes are regulated. Epigenetic 
regulators such as histone deacetylases (HDACs) and histone acetyltransferases 
(HATs) are increasingly being implicated as direct or indirect components in the 
regulation of expression of neuronal, immune and other tissue specific genes. 
HDACs and HATs have been shown to play important roles in cell growth, cell 
cycle control, development, differentiation and survival. Mutations in genes 
that encode HDAC-binding proteins cause neurological disorders, such as MeCP2 
mutations in Rett's syndrome. Mutations of CBP, a gene with HAT function, cause 
the mental retardation-associated Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Recently, HDAC 
inhibitors have been found to ameliorate progression of the spinal muscular 
atrophy (SMA) motor neuron disease and the Huntington disease mouse models. The 
neuroprotective role of HDAC inhibitors seems to extend to other diseases that 
share mechanisms of oxidative stress, inflammation and neuronal cell apoptosis. 
HDAC inhibitors also have widespread modulatory effects on gene expression 
within the immune system and have been used successfully in the lupus and 
rheumatoid arthritis autoimmune disease models. Recently, we demonstrated the 
efficacy of the HDAC inhibitor Trichostatin A in ameliorating disease in the 
multiple sclerosis (MS) animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis 
(EAE). In this review we describe the current literature surrounding these 
inhibitors and propose a rationale for harnessing both their neuroprotective and 
anti-inflammatory effects to treat MS, an autoimmune, demyelinating and 
degenerative disease of the human central nervous system (CNS).
