OBJECTIVES: Infliximab is an anti-tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) 
mouse-human IgG1/kappa antibody used to treat patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) and other inflammatory diseases. Unfortunately, response failure and 
side-effects due to immunogenicity of the drug are not rare. In this study, we 
have compared different methods of assessing drug levels and anti-infliximab 
antibodies (Abs) and analysed the character of these Abs in sera of RA patients 
treated with infliximab for 1.5-18 months.
METHODS: Functional serum infliximab levels and anti-infliximab Abs were 
measured by fluid-phase RIAs using 125I-labelled ligands in combination with 
molecular size and affinity chromatography, and immune complex precipitation.
RESULTS: Anti-infliximab Abs were predominantly IgG, 36% being IgG4, and half 
the immune complexes were lambda-light-chain-positive. Ab titres were associated 
with inhibition of TNF binding to the drug, and low trough levels of infliximab 
were most frequent in anti-infliximab Ab-positive sera. Cross-binding to two 
other anti-TNF drugs was not observed. Detection of anti-infliximab Abs by 
solid-phase RIA using cross-binding of plastic-fixed and soluble infliximab 
exhibited low sensitivity and the data were inconsistent with results obtained 
from binding of the Abs to soluble infliximab.
CONCLUSIONS: Specific and neutralizing anti-infliximab antibodies develop in RA 
patients treated with infliximab, and that low trough levels of functional 
infliximab are associated with the presence of such antibodies. The most 
sensitive antibody assay involved binding to soluble and intact infliximab. 
Assessments of bioavailability and immunogenicity of anti-TNF biologicals may be 
used to optimize dose regimens and prevent prolonged use of inadequate therapy.
