Osteoclasts are bone-resorbing cells derived from hematopoietic precursors of 
the monocyte-macrophage lineage. Regulation of osteoclast function is central to 
the understanding of bone diseases such as osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis 
and osteopetrosis. Although peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma 
(PPAR-gamma) has been shown to inhibit osteoblast differentiation, its role, if 
any, in osteoclasts is unknown. This is a clinically crucial question because 
PPAR-gamma agonists, "such as thiazolidinediones-" a class of 
insulin-sensitizing drugs, have been reported to cause a higher rate of 
fractures in human patients. Here we have uncovered a pro-osteoclastogenic 
effect of PPAR-gamma by using a Tie2Cre/flox mouse model in which PPAR-gamma is 
deleted in osteoclasts but not in osteoblasts. These mice develop osteopetrosis 
characterized by increased bone mass, reduced medullary cavity space and 
extramedullary hematopoiesis in the spleen. These defects are the result of 
impaired osteoclast differentiation and compromised receptor activator of 
nuclear factor-kappaB ligand signaling and can be rescued by bone marrow 
transplantation. Moreover, ligand activation of PPAR-gamma by rosiglitazone 
exacerbates osteoclast differentiation in a receptor-dependent manner. Our 
examination of the underlying mechanisms suggested that PPAR-gamma functions as 
a direct regulator of c-fos expression, an essential mediator of 
osteoclastogenesis. Therefore, PPAR-gamma and its ligands have a previously 
unrecognized role in promoting osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption.
