OBJECTIVE: To compare the expression of galectin 9 (Gal-9) in synovial tissue 
(ST) from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients and osteoarthritis (OA) patients 
and to evaluate the effects of Gal-9 on fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) in 
these patients.
METHODS: The expression of Gal-9 in ST and FLS was compared using 
immunohistochemical techniques. Apoptotic cells in RA and OA ST samples were 
detected by TUNEL assay. Apoptosis of FLS was analyzed by the sub-G(1) method in 
vitro. The in vivo suppressive effects of Gal-9 on collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) in a mouse model were also elucidated.
RESULTS: The percentage of Gal-9-positive cells in ST samples and the amount of 
Gal-9 in synovial fluid samples were significantly higher in patients with RA 
than in patients with OA, suggesting the involvement of Gal-9 in the development 
of RA. Compared with the 2 wild-type Gal-9 forms, stable Gal-9, a mutant protein 
resistant to proteolysis, significantly induced apoptosis of FLS from RA 
patients. In contrast, other galectins, such as Gal-1, Gal-3, and Gal-8, did not 
induce apoptosis or suppress the proliferation of human RA FLS. Stable Gal-9 
preferentially induced apoptosis and suppressed the proliferation of RA FLS in 
vitro. It also induced apoptosis of cells in RA ST implanted into SCID mice in 
vivo. In a mouse model of CIA, apoptotic cells were detected in the joints of 
stable Gal-9-treated mice, but not phosphate buffered saline-treated mice, and 
suppressed CIA characterized by pannus formation with inflammatory cell 
infiltration and bone/cartilage destruction.
CONCLUSION: Gal-9-induced apoptosis of hyperproliferative RA FLS may play a 
critical role in the suppression of RA.
