Investigation of hyperalgesia at the spinal transcriptome level indicated that 
carrageenan-induced inflammation of rat hind paws leads to a rapid but sustained 
increase in S100A8 and S100A9 expression, two genes implicated in the pathology 
of numerous inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid arthritis and gout. In 
situ hybridization revealed that the elevation occurred in neutrophils that 
migrate to the spinal cord vasculature during peripheral inflammation, not in 
spinal neurons or glial cells. Immunohistochemical analysis suggests, but does 
not prove, that these neutrophils abundantly release S100A8 and S100A9. 
Consistent with this, we detected an increase in ICAM and VCAM, both indicators 
of endothelial activation, a known trigger for secretion of S100A8 and S100A9. 
Migration of S100A8- and S100A9-expressing neutrophils to spinal cord is 
selective, since MCP-1- and CD68-expressing leukocytes do not increase in spinal 
cord vasculature during hind paw inflammation. Examination of many neutrophil 
granule mediators in spinal cord indicated that they are not regulated to the 
same degree as S100A8 and S100A9. Neutrophil migration also occurs in the 
vasculature of brain and pituitary gland during peripheral inflammation. 
Together, these findings suggest an interaction between a subpopulation of 
leukocytes and the CNS during peripheral tissue inflammation, as implied by an 
apparent release and possible diffusion of S100A8 and S100A9 through the 
endothelial blood-brain barrier. Although the present findings do not establish 
the neurophysiological or behavioral relevance of these observations to 
nociceptive processing, the data raise the possibility that selective 
populations of leukocytes may communicate the presence of disease or tissue 
damage from the periphery to cells in the central nervous system.
