OBJECTIVE: The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis is often linked to bacterial 
infections. The present study was undertaken to develop a mouse model of chronic 
destructive arthritis induced by repeated intraarticular (IA) exposure to 
bacterial cell wall fragments and to investigate the cytokine dependence of this 
model.
METHODS: Mice that were deficient in various cytokines were injected IA with 
cell wall fragments of Streptococcus pyogenes on days 0, 7, 14, and 21. The 
development of chronic destructive arthritis was compared between groups of mice 
lacking different cytokines, to assess which cytokines were crucial for 
development of chronic destructive arthritis.
RESULTS: Repeated exposure of a joint to S pyogenes cell wall fragments resulted 
in the development of chronic destructive arthritis. In mice deficient in 
recombination-activating gene 2, streptococcal cell wall (SCW)-directed T cell 
reactivity was found and chronic arthritis did not develop, implicating T cells 
in the generation of chronic SCW-induced arthritis. Interleukin-17 (IL-17) 
receptor-deficient mice showed a reduction of joint destruction in the chronic 
stage, implicating a detrimental role of the recently discovered IL-17-producing 
T helper cells (Th17 cells). IL-23 expression was apparent during the late 
stages of arthritis. Joint swelling was no longer dependent on tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNFalpha) after the last flare, and pronounced cartilage damage 
was found after 28 days in TNFalpha-deficient mice. In contrast, 
IL-1beta-deficient mice were fully protected against joint swelling and 
cartilage and bone destruction during the late stages of disease.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the TNFalpha dependence of arthritis is 
lost during the erosive stage, when Th17 cells become crucial. IL-1beta 
dependence remains strong, consistent with its pivotal role in the generation of 
Th17 cells.
