Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is an animal model, which closely resembles 
human rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in pathogenesis and pathology. Evidence suggests 
that the inhibition of T lymphocytes or their functions can alleviate the 
progression of arthritis. So the administration of arthritogenic T cell receptor 
(TCR) variable region peptide or DNA vaccines encoding pathogenic TCR Vbeta 
variable region may provide useful information for designing specific 
immunotherapies against autoimmune diseases. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) have the 
function of raising antigenic immunogenicity and HSP70 has a protective effect 
against arthritis. We previously demonstrated the presence of pathogenic 
predominant T cell receptor Vbeta5.2 and Vbeta8.2 clonotypes in the joints of 
CIA rats. In this study, we constructed the recombinant eukaryotic expression 
vectors pTARGET-TCR Vbeta5.2/8.2-HSP70, and evaluated their protective effects 
on CIA rats. Protective effects were observed in CIA rats by injecting these 
recombinant DNA vaccines, which could alleviate arthritis index, decrease the 
levels of IFN-gamma and anti-CII antibody in serum, and increase the levels of 
IL-4. Pathological changes were not as serious as those observed in control CIA 
rats. The rat injected with two combined vaccines showed better protective 
effects than CIA rats administered with individual vaccine. These results showed 
that recombinant DNA vaccines pTARGET-TCR Vbeta5.2-HSP70 and pTARGET-TCR 
Vbeta8.2-HSP70 could significantly alleviate the arthritic symptoms of CIA rats, 
and better protective effects could be achieved if these two vaccines were used 
in combination.
