Intraarticular gene transfer of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors to 
suppress synovial cell cycling has shown efficacy in treating animal models of 
rheumatoid arthritis. Endogenous CDK inhibitors also modulate immune function 
via a CDK-independent pathway. Accordingly, systemic administration of small 
molecules that inhibit CDK may or may not ameliorate arthritis. To address this 
issue, alvocidib (flavopiridol), known to be tolerated clinically for treating 
cancers, and a newly synthesized CDK4/6-selective inhibitor were tested for 
antiarthritic effects. In vitro, they inhibited proliferation of human and mouse 
synovial fibroblasts without inducing apoptosis. In vivo, treatment of 
collagen-induced arthritis mice with alvocidib suppressed synovial hyperplasia 
and joint destruction, whereas serum concentrations of anti-collagen type II 
(CII) Abs and proliferative responses to CII were maintained. Treatment was 
effective even when therapeutically administered. Treated mice developed 
arthritis after termination of treatment. Thus, immune responses to CII were 
unimpaired. The same treatment ameliorated arthritis induced by K/BxN serum 
transfer to lymphocyte-deficient mice. Similarly, the CDK4/6-selective inhibitor 
suppressed collagen-induced arthritis. Both small-molecule CDK inhibitors were 
effective in treating animal models of rheumatoid arthritis not by suppressing 
lymphocyte function. Thus, the two small-molecule CDK inhibitors ameliorated 
arthritis models in a distinctive way, compared with other immunosuppressive 
drugs.
