In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), the synovium is infiltrated by mononuclear cells 
that influence the proliferation and activation of fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
(FLS) through soluble mediators as well as cell-to-cell contact. To identify 
receptor-ligand pairs involved in this cross-talk, we cocultured T cells with 
FLS lines isolated from synovial tissues from RA patients. Coculture with T 
cells induced phosphorylation of Akt (Ser(473)) and its downstream mediators, 
GSK-3alpha/GSK-beta, FoxO1/3a, and mouse double minute-2, and enhanced FLS 
proliferation. T cell-mediated phospho-Akt up-regulation was unique for FLS as 
no such effect was observed upon interaction of T cells with dendritic cells and 
B cells. Akt activation was induced by all functional T cell subsets independent 
of MHC/Ag recognition and was also found with other leukocyte populations, 
suggesting the involvement of a common leukocyte cell surface molecule. Akt 
phosphorylation, enhanced in vitro FLS proliferation, and enhanced FLS IL-6 
production was inhibited by blocking Abs to CD11a and ICAM-2 whereas Abs to 
ICAM-1 had a lesser effect. Selective involvement of the LFA-1-ICAM-2 pathway 
was confirmed by the finding of increased ezrin phosphorylation at Tyr(353) that 
is known to be downstream of ICAM-2 and supports cell survival through Akt 
activation. CD28(-) T cells, which are overrepresented in RA patients, have high 
CD11a cell surface expression and induce Akt phosphorylation in FLS more 
potently than their CD28(+) counterparts. These findings identify ICAM-2 as a 
potential therapeutic target to inhibit FLS activation in RA, allowing for a 
more selective intervention than broad LFA-1 inhibition.
