OBJECTIVE: We previously reported that the Val58Ile polymorphism of the 
leukocyte cell-derived chemotaxin 2 gene (LECT2) is associated with the severity 
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). To define the role of LECT2 in inflammatory 
arthritides, we investigated the development of collagen antibody-induced 
arthritis (CAIA) in LECT2-deficient (LECT2(-/-)) mice.
METHODS: CAIA was induced in mice by administering anti-type II collagen 
antibodies followed by lipopolysaccharide. Daily assessment of hind paw swelling 
was used to monitor the development of arthritis. The histopathologic features 
and expression of inflammatory cytokines were also analyzed. We confirmed the 
role of LECT2 by introducing a LECT2 expression vector into LECT2(-/-) mice, 
using a hydrodynamic gene transfer method.
RESULTS: Arthritis in LECT2(-/-) mice was significantly exacerbated compared 
with that in wild-type (WT) controls. Histopathologic assessment of the tarsal 
joints showed that inflammation and erosion of cartilage and bone in LECT2(-/-) 
mice were more severe than that in controls. Interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), IL-6, 
and certain chemokines were present at significantly higher levels in the 
arthritic hind paws of LECT2(-/-) mice. In contrast, the amount of LECT2 in the 
serum and locally in the hind paws was higher in arthritic WT mice. Finally, 
hydrodynamic gene transfer experiments revealed that the severity of arthritis 
was reduced by the systemic expression of exogenous mouse LECT2 protein in 
LECT2(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSION: These results strongly suggest that LECT2 directly suppresses the 
development of CAIA. Manipulation of LECT2 might provide a rationale for novel 
therapeutic approaches to the treatment of inflammatory arthritides such as RA.
