A marked proliferation of synovial fibroblasts in joints leads to pannus 
formation in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Various kinds of cytokines are produced 
in the pannus. The purpose of this study is to elucidate the effects of 
phosphodiesterase 4 (PDE4) inhibitors in a new animal model for the evaluation 
of pannus formation and cytokine production in the pannus. Mice sensitized with 
methylated bovine serum albumin (mBSA) were challenged by subcutaneous 
implantation of a membrane filter soaked in mBSA solution in the back of the 
mice. Drugs were orally administered for 10 days. The granuloma formed around 
the filter was collected on day 11. It was chopped into pieces and cultured in 
vitro for 24 hr. The cytokines were measured in the supernatants. The type of 
cytokines produced in the granuloma was quite similar to those produced in 
pannus in RA. Both PDE4 inhibitors, KF66490 and SB207499, suppressed the 
production of IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and IL-12, and the increase in 
myeloperoxidase activity, a marker enzyme for neutrophils and hydroxyproline 
content. Compared to leflunomide, PDE4 inhibitors more strongly suppressed IL-12 
production and the increase in myeloperoxidase activity. PDE4 inhibitors also 
inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced TNF-alpha and IL-12 production from 
thioglycolate-induced murine peritoneal macrophages and the proliferation of rat 
synovial fibroblasts. These results indicate this model makes it easy to 
evaluate the effect of drugs on various cytokine productions in a granuloma 
without any purification step and may be a relevant model for evaluating novel 
antirheumatic drugs on pannus formation in RA. PDE4 inhibitors could have 
therapeutic effects on pannus formation in RA by inhibition of cytokine 
production by macrophages and synovial fibroblast proliferation.
