The chemokine receptor CXCR3 is involved in various inflammatory diseases, such 
as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, and allograft rejection 
in transplantation patients. The CXCR3 ligands CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11 are 
expressed at sites of inflammation, and they attract CXCR3-bearing lymphocytes, 
thus contributing to the inflammatory process. In this study, we characterize 
five nonpeptidergic compounds of different chemical classes that block the 
action of CXCL10 and CXCL11 at the human CXCR3, i.e., the 
3H-pyrido[2,3-d]pyrimidin-4-one derivatives 
N-1R-[3-(4-ethoxy-phenyl)-4-oxo-3,4-dihydro-pyrido[2,3-d]pyrimidin-2-yl]-ethyl-N-pyridin-3-ylmethyl-2-(4-fluoro-3-trifluoromethyl-phenyl)-acetamide 
(VUF10472/NBI-74330) and 
N-1R-[3-(4-ethoxy-phenyl)-4-oxo-3,4-dihydro-pyrido[2,3-d]pyrimidin-2-yl]-ethyl-N-pyridin-3-ylmethyl-2-(4-trifluoromethoxy-phenyl)-acetamide 
(VUF10085/AMG-487), the 3H-quinazolin-4-one decanoic acid 
{1-[3-(4-cyano-phenyl)-4-oxo-3,4-dihydro-quinazolin-2-yl]-ethyl}-(2-dimethylamino-ethyl)-amide 
(VUF5834), the imidazolium compound 
1,3-bis-[2-(3,4-dichloro-phenyl)-2-oxo-ethyl]-3H-imidazol-1-ium bromide 
(VUF10132), and the quaternary ammonium anilide 
N,N-dimethyl-N-[4-[[[2-(4-methylphenyl)-6,7-dihydro-5H-benzocyclohepten-8-yl]-carbonyl]amino]benzyl] 
tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-aminium chloride (TAK-779). To understand the action of 
these CXCR3 antagonists in various animal models of disease, the compounds were 
also tested at rat and mouse CXCR3, as well as at CXCR3 from rhesus macaque, 
which was cloned and characterized for the first time in this study. Except for 
TAK-779, all compounds show slightly lower affinity for rodent CXCR3 than for 
primate CXCR3. In addition, we have characterized the molecular mechanism of 
action of the various antagonists at the human CXCR3 receptor. All tested 
compounds act as noncompetitive antagonists at CXCR3. Moreover, this 
noncompetitive behavior is accompanied by inverse agonistic properties of all 
five compounds as determined on an identified constitutively active mutant of 
CXCR3, CXCR3 N3.35A. It is interesting to note that all compounds except TAK-779 
act as full inverse agonists at CXCR3 N3.35A. TAK-779 shows weak partial inverse 
agonism at CXCR3 N3.35A, and it probably has a different mode of interaction 
with CXCR3 than the other two classes of small-molecule inverse agonists.
