Angiogenesis means the formation of new blood vessels from preexisting vascular, 
is of fundamental importance in several pathological states such as tumor 
growth, rheumatoid arthritis, and diabetic retinopathy. Angiogenesis involves a 
set of steps, including activation and movement of endothelial cells and tube 
formation. Control of these steps by drugs or dietary food components is a 
hopeful approach for the prevention of angiogenic disorders. Based on these 
backgrounds, we searched the anti-angiogenic food components. As a result, we 
found that tocotrienol (T3), especially delta, beta, and gamma-T3 has the potent 
anti-angiogenic activity in vitro and in vivo experiments. T3, which is rich in 
rice bran and palm oil, inhibited growth factor-induced proliferation, migration 
and tube formation in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. T3 showed 
inhibition of tumor cell-induced angiogenesis in mouse dorsal air sac (DOS) 
assay. These results indicated that T3 is a potent anti-angiogenesis compound. 
Tocopherol (Toc) did not inhibit angiogenesis. The anti-angiogenic mechanism of 
T3 and Toc was evaluated by western blotting. T3 inhibited activation of growth 
factor-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase, Akt (protein kinase B), 
and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), which are located downstream of 
the various growth factor receptors. T3 suppressed phosphorylation of vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor 2. These effects were dose-dependent 
manner. Anti-angiogenic mechanism of T3 mediates inhibition of growth factor 
induced survival, migration and angiogenesis signals. These findings suggested 
that T3 may have potential for preventing angiogenic disorders in humans.
