Chemokines, including RANTES/CCL5 and MCP-1/CCL2, are highly expressed in the 
joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and they promote leukocyte 
migration into the synovial tissue. This study was conducted to determine 
whether the inhibition of RANTES and MCP-1 therapeutically was capable of 
ameliorating rat of adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA). Postonset treatment of AIA 
using a novel inhibitor for endogenous MCP-1 (P8A-MCP-1) improved clinical signs 
of arthritis and histological scores measuring joint destruction, synovial 
lining, macrophage infiltration, and bone erosion. Using immunohistochemistry, 
ELISA, real-time RT-PCR, and Western blot analysis, we defined joint 
inflammation, bony erosion, monocyte migration, proinflammatory cytokines, and 
bone markers, and p-p38 levels were reduced in rat AIA treated with P8A-MCP-1. 
In contrast, neither the dominant-negative inhibitor for endogenous RANTES 
(44AANA47-RANTES) nor the CCR1/CCR5 receptor antagonist, methionylated-RANTES, 
had an effect on clinical signs of arthritis when administered after disease 
onset. Additionally, therapy with the combination of 44AANA47-RANTES plus 
P8A-MCP-1 did not ameliorate AIA beyond the effect observed using P8A-MCP-1 
alone. Treatment with P8A-MCP-1 reduced joint TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, and vascular 
endothelial growth factor levels. P8A-MCP-1 also decreased p38 MAPK activation 
in the joint. Our results indicate that inhibition of MCP-1 with P8A-MCP-1 after 
the onset of clinically detectable disease ameliorates AIA and decreases 
macrophage accumulation, cytokine expression, and p38 MAPK activation within the 
joint.
