OBJECTIVES: The viral gene transfer of interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL1ra) 
and interleukin 10 (IL10) into rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovial fibroblasts 
(RASFs) has shown protective effects on cartilage destruction in the severe 
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse model of RA. Nevertheless, side effects 
of viral transduction are possible and a number of cytokines or cytokine 
inhibitors are not available encoded in viral vehicles. As the production of 
viruses coding for bioactive proteins is cost and time intensive, we established 
an in vivo long-term release model using osmotic minipumps in the SCID mouse 
model for RA.
METHODS: Isolated RASFs were cultured for four passages and coimplanted together 
with human cartilage and an Alzet osmotic miniature pump model 2004, containing 
200 microl of IL10 and IL1ra for 40 days in SCID mice. Implants were removed 
after 40 days and evaluated histologically. The actual rates of IL10 and IL1ra 
in murine serum were measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Release of IL10 and IL1ra by the pumps was effective as both could be 
measured in significant amounts in the serum of the mice. IL10 and IL1ra release 
showed protective effects towards the coimplanted cartilage, similar to the 
adenovirally IL10/IL1ra-transduced RASFs. The mean (SD) invasion scores for the 
implants with the osmotic pumps were: invasion 0.7 (0.5), degradation 0.5 (0.3) 
(all parameters significant vs controls, p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate that the combination of osmotic pumps with 
the SCID mouse model for RA can be used as approach for application and 
evaluation of cartilage-protective molecules. Furthermore, the effect of 
cartilage-protective cytokines is independent of the type of application.
