OBJECTIVE: Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) has been shown to exert potent 
immunomodulatory activity, and the use of lentiviral vectors has been found to 
be an effective means of gene delivery. The present study was therefore 
undertaken to investigate the feasibility and efficiency of gene therapy using 
lentiviral vectors expressing VIP (LentiVIP) for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We evaluated the therapeutic potential of the gene therapy strategy in 
the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model, administering the vectors at 
different phases of the disease. The inflammatory response was determined by 
measuring the levels of various inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the 
joints and serum. The Th1-mediated response was evaluated by determining the 
proliferative response and cytokine profile of T cells stimulated with 
autoantigen.
RESULTS: A single intraperitoneal injection of LentiVIP was highly effective in 
treating CIA. Mice with established, severe arthritis showed complete regression 
of the disease. The therapeutic effect of LentiVIP was associated with 
widespread biodistribution of the vector and increased VIP levels, especially in 
joints and lymphoid organs, and was mediated through a striking reduction of the 
2 deleterious components of the disease, i.e., the autoimmune response 
(self-reactive Th1 cell activity and autoantibody production) and the 
inflammatory response. LentiVIP treatment also induced the generation and/or 
activation of CD4+,CD25+,FoxP3+ Treg cells in arthritic mice.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show that in vivo administration of lentiviral vector 
expressing VIP produces one of the most potent therapeutic effects described so 
far in any animal model of RA. We propose that VIP gene transfer should be 
further investigated as a potential novel, effective treatment of RA and other 
chronic autoimmune disorders.
