OBJECTIVES: The eventual role of a disintegrin and a metalloproteinase 8 (ADAM8) 
in osteoclastogenesis was studied in erosive rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and in 
vitro.
METHODS: ADAM8 protein and mRNA expression was measured in RA pannus and 
synovitis and compared to osteoarthritic (OA) synovial membrane. Human monocytes 
were isolated and stimulated with proinflammatory cytokines and their ADAM8 
expression and surface ADAM8 were measured. Human peripheral blood monocytes and 
RAW 264.7 mouse monocyte/macrophage cells were stimulated to osteclast 
like-cells, and their expression of ADAM8 and osteoclastic markers (calcitonin 
receptor, integrin beta 3, cathepsin K, TRAP) were analysed. Transfection and 
small interfering RNA (siRNA) were used to assess the role of ADAM8 in formation 
of polykaryons.
RESULTS: Increased numbers of ADAM8 positive cells were shown particularly in 
the pannus-cartilage/bone junction close or adjoining to TRAP positive 
multinucleate cells under formation (60 (2)% in pannus, 47 (2)% in synovitis vs 
10 (1)% in OA, p<0.001). Human pannus contained high ADAM8 mRNA copy numbers (23 
(7) in pannus, 14 (4) in synovitis vs 1.7 (0.3) in OA, p<0.001). Functional 
studies in vitro disclosed ADAM8 mRNA and protein, which was first converted to 
a proteolytically active and then to fusion-active form. Gene transfection and 
siRNA experiments enhanced and inhibited, respectively, expression of osteoclast 
markers and maturation of multinuclear cells.
CONCLUSIONS: ADAM8 may be involved in bone destruction in RA because it is 
upregulated in RA pannus adjacent to developing erosions and enhances maturation 
of osteoclast-like cells.
