OBJECTIVES: to evaluate specificity and sensibility of the rheumatoid factors 
(RF), the anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (CCP) and the 
anti-keratin antibodies (AKA) according to the rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
diagnosis; pathology other than RA with at least one of these marker positive; 
the significance of the flocculent fluorescence of the antibodies AKA by 
indirect immunofluorescence (IIF).
METHOD: two hundred forty height patients were studied: 121 RA, 89 inflammatory 
rheumatisms, 23 non inflammatory rheumatisms, and 15 non rheumatic affections. 
The RF was investigated by nephelometry, the anti-CCP by immunofluorometry and 
the AKA by IIF on rat oesophagus.
RESULTS: specificity and sensibility were respectively in a retrospective 
manner: 68% and 83% for the RF, 95% and 76% for the anti- CCP, 83% and 40% for 
the AKA during RA with evolution of less than one year. The rates of agreements 
were: RF versus CCP: 81%, RF versus AKA: 57%, CCP versus AKA: 73%. Twelve 
patients with pathologies different from RA have positive anti-CCP or AKA. 
Thirty three of the patients with anti-CCP level superior to 130 U/mL have 
flocculent AKA versus only 5% when the anti-CCP are lower than 130 U/mL.
CONCLUSION: the RF and the anti-CCP are complementary in RA. Autoimmune and 
neoplasic pathologies are sometimes responsible for the positivity of the 
anti-CCP and the AKA. The flocculent aspect of AKA in IIF may be associated with 
raised concentrations of anti-CCP.
