OBJECTIVE: Interferon-gamma-inducible protein 10 (IP-10; also called CXCL10), a 
chemokine important in the migration and proliferation of T cells, is induced in 
a wide variety of cell types. However, the role of IP-10 in rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) remains largely unknown. The purpose of this study was to examine the 
potential role of IP-10 in bone resorption and RA through examination of a mouse 
model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: The effects of IP-10 on mouse T cells during osteoclast differentiation 
were examined in migration assays. The bone-erosive activity of IP-10 was 
determined in vivo in a mouse model of CIA by histologic and immunostaining 
analyses. Cytokine levels in serum and culture medium were measured with 
sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays.
RESULTS: Serum concentrations of IP-10 were significantly higher in mice with 
CIA than in control mice. RANKL greatly induced IP-10 expression in osteoclast 
precursors, but not in mature osteoclasts. IP-10 stimulated the expression of 
RANKL and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) in CD4+ T cells and induced 
osteoclastogenesis in cocultures of CD4+ T cells and osteoclast precursors. 
However, IP-10 did not induce RANKL or TNFalpha in CD8+ T cells. Treatment with 
neutralizing antibody to IP-10 significantly inhibited the infiltration of CD4+ 
T cells and F4/80+ macrophages into the synovium and attenuated bone destruction 
in mice with CIA. Furthermore, levels of RANKL and TNFalpha were inhibited by 
antibody to IP-10. Bone erosion was observed in mice infected with an IP-10 
retrovirus.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that IP-10 plays a critical role in the 
infiltration of CD4+ T cells and F4/80+ macrophages into inflamed joints and 
causes bone destruction. Our results provide the first evidence that IP-10 
contributes to the recruitment of inflammatory cells and is involved in bone 
erosion in inflamed joints.
