A mechanism-based model for pharmacodynamic effects of dexamethasone (DEX) was 
incorporated into our model for arthritis disease progression in the rat to aid 
in identification of the primary factors responsible for edema and bone loss. 
Collagen-induced arthritis was produced in male Lewis rats after injection of 
type II porcine collagen. DEX was given subcutaneously in single doses of 0.225 
or 2.25 mg/kg or 7-day multiple doses of 0.045 or 0.225 mg/kg at 21 days 
postdisease induction. Effects on disease progression were measured by paw 
swelling, bone mineral density (BMD), body weights, plasma corticosterone (CST), 
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, and 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) mRNA expression in paw tissue. Lumbar and femur BMD 
was determined by PIXImus II dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. Plasma CST was 
assayed by high-performance liquid chromatography. Cytokine and GR mRNA were 
assayed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Indirect response 
models, drug interaction models, transduction processes, and the 
fifth-generation model of corticosteroid dynamics were integrated and applied 
using S-ADAPT software to describe how dexamethasone binding to GR can regulate 
diverse processes. Cytokine mRNA, GR mRNA, plasma CST, and paw edema were 
suppressed after DEX administration. TNF-alpha mRNA expression and BMD seemed to 
increase immediately after dosing but were ultimately reduced. Model parameters 
indicated that IL-6 and IL-1beta were most sensitive to inhibition by DEX. 
TNF-alpha seemed to primarily influence edema, whereas IL-6 contributed the most 
to bone loss. Lower doses of corticosteroids may be sufficient to suppress the 
cytokines most relevant to bone erosion.
