The selective, high affinity A(2B) adenosine receptor (AdoR) antagonists that 
were synthesized by several research groups should aid in determining the role 
of the A(2B) AdoR in inflammatory diseases like asthma or rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) and angiogenic diseases like diabetic retinopathy or cancer. CV 
Therapeutics scientists discovered the selective, high affinity A(2B) AdoR 
antagonist 10, a 8-(4-pyrazolyl)-xanthine derivative [CVT-6883, K(i)(hA(2B)) = 
22 nM; K(i)(hA(1)) = 1,940 nM; K(i)(hA(2A)) = 3,280; and K(i)(hA(3)) = 1,070 nM] 
that has favorable pharmacokinetic (PK) properties (t (1/2) = 4 h and F > 35% 
rat). Compound 10 demonstrated functional antagonism at the A(2B) AdoR (K(B) = 6 
nM) and efficacy in a mouse model of asthma. In two phase 1 clinical trials, 
CVT-6883 was found to be safe, well tolerated, and suitable for once daily 
dosing. A second compound 20, 8-(5-pyrazolyl)-xanthine, has been nominated for 
development from Baraldi's group in conjunction with King Pharmaceuticals that 
has favorable A(2B) AdoR affinity and selectivity [K(i)(hA(2B)) = 5.5 nM; 
K(i)(hA(1)) > 1,000 nM; K(i)(hA(2A)) > 1,000; and K(i)(hA(3)) > 1,000 nM], and 
it has been demonstrated to be a functional antagonist. A third compound 32, a 
2-aminopyrimidine, from the Almirall group has high A(2B) AdoR affinity and 
selectivity [K(i)(hA(2B)) = 17 nM; K(i)(hA(1)) > 1,000 nM; K(i)(hA(2A)) > 2,500; 
and K(i)(hA(3)) > 1,000 nM], and 32 has been moved into preclinical safety 
testing. Since three highly selective, high affinity A(2B) AdoR antagonists have 
been nominated for development with 10 (CVT-6883) being the furthest along in 
the development process, the role of the A(2B) AdoR in various disease states 
will soon be established.
