The endoplasmic reticulum chaperone and stress protein BiP has hitherto been 
considered as having only crucial intracellular cell protective functions. 
However, we have shown that BiP can be present in the extracellular environment 
and that it binds to a putative but as yet uncloned cell surface receptor. It 
will stimulate human monocytes via this receptor to express a gene profile that 
is anti-inflammatory. It will generate T cells with a regulatory function from 
human peripheral blood most likely by altering dendritic cell development. 
Intravenous BiP will both prevent and treat ongoing collagen induced arthritis 
in the DBA/1 mouse. Part of the suppression of arthritis is linked to 
interleukin (IL)4 as BiP-specific lymph node and spleen cells from these mice 
secrete IL4, and BiP has no suppressive effect on collagen induced arthritis in 
IL4 knockout mice. Lymph node and spleen cells isolated from mice administered 
intravenous BiP will suppress arthritis when transferred intravenously into 
recipient arthritic mice without any further BiP having to be given. Thus, both 
in vitro work with human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and in vivo work in 
the collagen arthritis model lead to the conclusion that BiP induces regulatory 
cells. Finally, intravenous BiP will ablate the inflammatory cell infiltrate and 
inflammatory cytokine expression in rheumatoid synovial membrane tissue 
transplanted subcutaneously into SCID mice. The conclusion from all this 
experimental work is that BiP may be a novel therapy for the treatment of 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
