INTRODUCTION: There have been several cases reporting a significant increase in 
chondroitin sulphate plasma levels in patients with different types of disease, 
such as systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and liver disease. 
At present, the precise role of chondroitin sulphate molecules in blood is 
unclear. Previous investigations have shown that the addition of purified human 
plasma glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), containing a high percentage of 
chondroitin-4-sulphate (C4S) was able to inhibit lipid peroxidation and to 
protect cells from reactive oxygen species damage, suggesting antioxidant 
activity. Starting from these reports, the aim of this study was to evaluate the 
effectiveness of GAG structures purified from normal human plasma in reducing 
inflammation using a model of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced increase of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines in mouse articular chondrocyte cultures.
RESULTS: Chondrocyte stimulation with LPS (50 microg/ml) for 24 h enhanced gene 
expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-1 beta 
(IL-1beta), interleukin 6 (IL-6), interferon gamma (IFN-gamma), inducible nitric 
oxide synthase (iNOS) and increases in their related protein levels, as well as 
NF-kappaB activation, IkappaBalpha phosphorylation and apoptosis evaluated by 
the increase in caspase-3 expression and its related protein amount. LPS 
treatment also generated a high amount of nitric oxide (NO). The addition of 
different doses of purified human GAGs to LPS-stimulated chondrocytes reduced 
inflammatory cytokines and iNOS both at mRNA and protein levels, blocked 
NF-kappaB activation and cytoplasmic IkappaBalpha phosphorylation, limited cell 
death by inhibiting apoptosis, and reduced NO concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: These results further support the hypothesis that plasma GAGs may 
function as immunomodulators and their increased release and degradation could 
be a biological response acting to modulate inflammation during disease.
