The mammalian immune system applies somatic hypermutation to select for 
antibodies with improved dissociation rates in vivo up to an intrinsic limit, 
previously termed as affinity ceiling. However, for certain therapeutic 
applications it may be desirable to further improve antibody affinities beyond 
that limit. In this study the selection of antibodies specific for the 
pro-inflammatory cytokine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(GM-CSF) from the HuCAL GOLD human antibody library is described. In order to 
increase affinity and also functional activity, in vitro affinity maturation of 
a pool of lead Fab candidates was carried out. CDR-L3 and parallel CDR-H2 
diversification using trinucleotide consensus cassettes were followed by the 
combination of optimized CDR-L3 and CDR-H2 leading to a 5000-fold improved 
affinity finally reaching a K(D) of 400 fM. Cytokine neutralizing potential of 
MOR04357 was evaluated in a TF-1 proliferation assay. Along with affinity 
optimization a 2000-fold increase in potency was observed compared to the 
parental antibody. Due to species cross-reactivity MOR04357 also blocks rat 
GM-CSF induced proliferation of FDCP-1 cells. Receptor inhibition studies showed 
that MOR04357 prevents the interaction of GM-CSF with the GM-CSF receptor alpha 
chain. As a consequence this leads to a blockade in signal transduction as 
measured by abolished STAT5 phosphorylation in the presence of GM-CSF and 
antibody. Due to its pro-inflammatory role GM-CSF has been implicated in the 
pathophysiology of inflammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis or asthma. 
Based on the mode of action described herein MOR04357 shows favourable antibody 
features as a potential drug candidate.
