OBJECTIVE: Accumulating evidence indicates an important role of neutrophils in 
the development of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Recruitment of neutrophils to the 
joint space and release of proteolytic enzymes can exacerbate tissue damage and 
the inflammatory response related to RA. Engagement of beta2 integrin and 
subsequent activation of downstream signaling have been shown to be fundamental 
for activation of neutrophil effector functions. The aim of this study was to 
test the hypothesis that Vav and phospholipase Cgamma2 (PLCgamma2), two 
molecules involved in integrin signaling, are required for arthritis generation 
and neutrophil activation in a mouse model of arthritis.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in wild-type (WT), Vav(null), and PLCgamma2(-/-) 
mice using the K/BxN serum-transfer model. Neutrophil function was assessed by 
analyses of adhesion, spreading, and degranulation on integrin-dependent 
substrates. Regulation of integrin signaling was determined by analyzing the 
phosphorylation of Pyk-2, Src, and ERK.
RESULTS: Vav(null) and PLCgamma2(-/-) mice were protected from inflammation and 
bone erosion in the K/BxN serum-transfer model of arthritis. Mechanistically, 
Vav and PLCgamma2 control neutrophils mediated spreading and degranulation on 
integrin-dependent substrates. Consequently, the Vav/PLCgamma2 axis, acting 
downstream of the integrin receptor, modulated the activation of Pyk-2, Src, and 
ERK.
CONCLUSION: Our findings show that Vav cooperates with PLCgamma2 in modulating 
neutrophil activation downstream of the integrin receptor. This study identifies 
a Vav/PLCgamma2-dependent signaling pathway as a possible therapeutic target for 
the treatment of inflammation and bone disruption in arthritis.
