Cytokines are crucial in host defence against pathogens such as bacteria, 
viruses, fungi and parasites. A newly described cytokine, interleukin-32 
(IL-32), induces various proinflammatory cytokines (tumour necrosis 
factor-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6) and chemokines in both human and mouse cells 
through the nuclear factor-kappaB and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase 
inflammatory signal pathway. The IL-32 primarily acts on monocytic cells rather 
than T cells. In an attempt to isolate the IL-32 soluble receptor, we used an 
IL-32 ligand-affinity column to purify neutrophil proteinase 3, which is a 
serine proteinase involved in many inflammatory diseases. IL-32 has biological 
activity associated with Mycobacterium tuberculosis and chronic proinflammatory 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis. IL-32 is transcribed as six alternative 
splice variants and the biological activity of each individual isoform remains 
unknown. Here, we cloned the complementary DNA of the four IL-32 isoforms 
(alpha, beta, gamma and delta) that are the most representative IL-32 
transcripts. To produce recombinant protein with a high yield, the amino acids 
of two cysteine residues were mutated to serine residues, because serine 
residues are not conserved among different species. The multi-step purified 
recombinant IL-32 isoform proteins were assessed for their biological activities 
with different cytokine assays. The gamma isoform of IL-32 was the most active, 
although all isoforms were biologically active. The present study will provide a 
specific target to neutralize endogenous IL-32, which may contribute to basic 
and clinical immunology.
