OBJECTIVES: Pannus is invasive granulation tissue found on the articular 
cartilage having rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, pannus-like tissue has also 
been found in osteoarthritis (OA). Our previous study showed that pannus-like 
tissue in OA (OA pannus) was frequently found in human OA samples. The purpose 
of the study is to investigate the development and the characteristics of OA 
pannus in a rat OA model.
DESIGN: Ligaments of the knee joint were transected in Wister rats to induce OA. 
The knee joints were removed at weeks 1, 2, 4 and 6, and subjected to 
histological study. Samples were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), 
Safranin-O and immuno-stained for vimentin, CD34, type II collagen and MMP-3. 
The whole knee joint of OA rats was implanted in SCID mice and kept for a 
further 3 weeks. Then the histological findings were evaluated in HE sections.
RESULT: OA pannus appeared at week 2 and extend over the articular surface. OA 
pannus cells were positive for vimentin and/or CD34. At week 6, a part of 
articular surface was restored with matrix. OA pannus cells expressed MMP-3 as 
well as type II collagen. Histological study of rat OA knees implanted in SCID 
mice showed that OA pannus cells filled the joint space and invaded articular 
cartilage.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of OA pannus was found in a rat OA model and its 
features were similar to those in human OA. OA pannus had both catabolic and 
reparative features, and the latter feature were speculated to be dominant in 
the later phase of the disease under a certain environmental condition.
