OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) pannus may be dependent on angiogenesis and 
several critical growth factors including vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF) and basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). 2-Methoxyestradiol (2ME2), an 
endogenous metabolite with low estrogen receptor affinity, has both 
antiangiogenic and antiproliferative activity. 2ME2 was assessed in the rat 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model to determine if it could prevent or 
involute established synovitis.
METHODS: Rats were immunized on Day 0 with collagen and randomized to a vehicle 
control or two 2ME2 prevention arms. In additional studies, multiple parallel 
treatment arms were initiated at Day 10 after arthritis onset.
RESULTS: 2ME2 in preventive protocols at 30 or 100 mg/kg significantly delayed 
the onset and reduced the severity of clinical and radiographic CIA. In 
established CIA, oral 2ME2 at 50 mg/kg/bid, 100 mg/kg/day, and 300 mg/kg/day 
reduced severity compared to vehicle controls. Efficacy of 2ME2 delivery by 
osmotic pumps at 60 mg/kg/day was equivalent to 300 mg/kg/day by daily gavage. 
The 3 oral treatment protocols all significantly reduced radiographic scores in 
a dose-dependent fashion, with the greatest benefit at 300 mg/kg. 2ME2 showed 
marked suppression of synovial gene expression of proangiogenic bFGF and VEGF, 
with parallel reduction of synovial blood vessels. Serum antibody levels to 
native type II collagen were not reduced, suggesting that 2ME2 did not influence 
humoral immunity.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that 2ME2 may represent a novel agent for the 
treatment of inflammatory autoimmune diseases such as RA.
