AIM OF THIS STUDY: Daphnetin was regarded as the mark compound for quality 
control of Zushima-Pian, a traditional Chinese medicine tablet for treating 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, no in vivo study on the therapeutic effects 
of daphnetin for RA has been reported.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The adjuvant arthritic (AA) rat model was developed to 
evaluate the anti-arthritic effects of daphnetin. After immunized with Freund's 
complete adjuvant (FCA), the rats were treated with daphnetin (2.25 and 
4.5mg/kg) for three weeks. We determined the change of secondary paw swelling 
and the arthritis scores of these tested rats. The severity of arthritis in the 
knee joints was evaluated by histological assessment of cartilage destruction. 
The levels of IL-1, TNF-alpha and MIF in the serum were measured by ELISA.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that daphnetin significantly reduced 
paw swelling and decreased the arthritis scores. The pathological examination 
demonstrated that articular cartilage degeneration with synovial hyperplasia and 
inflammatory cells infiltration in AA rats were suppressed by daphnetin. There 
was significant reduction in production of interleukin-1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF-alpha) and macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) in serum of 
AA rats treated with daphnetin except the low dose group (2.25mg/kg) on 
TNF-alpha. In conclusion, we demonstrates that daphnetin is highly effective on 
preventing and suppressing the development and progression of adjuvant-induced 
arthritis and provides direct evidences that daphnetin is one of the active 
principle of Zushima-Pian for treating rheumatoid arthritis.
