Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a sexually dimorphic, autoimmune inflammatory 
disorder affecting the joints. Joint disability in RA results primarily from 
loss of matrix components (collagen and glycosoaminoglycan) in the cartilage and 
synovium. This study was carried out to understand the effect of physiological 
levels of testosterone, estrogen, and progesterone on oxidative stress-induced 
changes in matrix composition in rat synovium in arthritis. Arthritis induction 
in castrated and ovariectomized rats resulted in enhanced oxidative stress and 
this was assessed by lipid peroxidation levels and depletion of antioxidants. 
This, in turn, led to significantly (p < 0.01) increased levels of TNF-alpha and 
matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), subsequently resulting in loss of collagen, 
elastin, and glycosoaminoglycan (GAG) and disorganization of reticulin as 
evidenced by biochemical quantitation and also by staining for collagen, 
reticulin, and elastin. Treatment with physiological doses of 
dihydrotestosterone (25 mg topically) and estrogen (5 microg/0.1 ml 
subcutaneously) restored the antioxidant levels significantly (p < 0.05) and 
reduced the levels of TNF-alpha and MMP-2, with estrogen exhibiting a higher 
potency. This, in turn, attenuated the damage to reticulin organization as well 
as the loss of collagen and GAG in the articular tissues. However, elastin loss 
could not be attenuated by either treatment. Progesterone (2 mg/0.1 ml 
subcutaneously) was not shown to have any significance in disease modification, 
and on the contrary, it inhibited the protective effects of estrogen. However, 
progesterone contributed to increased collagen levels in the tissues.
