Green tea, a product of the dried leaves of Camellia sinensis, is the most 
widely consumed beverage in the world. The polyphenolic compounds from green tea 
(PGT) possess antiinflammatory properties. We investigated whether PGT can 
afford protection against autoimmune arthritis and also examined the 
immunological basis of this effect using the rat adjuvant arthritis (AA) model 
of human rheumatoid arthritis (RA). AA can be induced in Lewis rats (RT.1(l)) by 
immunization with heat-killed Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Ra (Mtb), and 
arthritic rats raise a T cell response to the mycobacterial heat-shock protein 
65 (Bhsp65). Rats consumed green tea (2-12 g/L) in drinking water for 1-3 wk and 
then were injected with Mtb to induce disease. Thereafter, they were observed 
regularly and graded for signs of arthritis. Subgroups of these rats were killed 
at defined time points and their draining lymph node cells were harvested and 
tested for T cell proliferative and cytokine responses. Furthermore, the sera 
collected from these rats were tested for anti-Bhsp65 antibodies. Feeding 8 g/L 
PGT to Lewis rats for 9 d significantly reduced the severity of arthritis 
compared with the water-fed controls. Interestingly, PGT-fed rats had a lower 
concentration of the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-17 but a greater 
concentration of the immunoregulatory cytokine IL-10 than controls. PGT feeding 
also suppressed the anti-Bhsp65 antibody response. Thus, green tea induced 
changes in arthritis-related immune responses. We suggest further systematic 
exploration of dietary supplementation with PGT as an adjunct nutritional 
strategy for the management of RA.
