Treatment of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA) has improved quality of life in 
children and adolescents suffering from JIA. However, it varies considerably 
from caregiver to caregiver. Therefore a standardisation of care on the basis of 
consensus treatment recommendations offers the chance to further improve the 
quality of care for children and adolescents with JIA. We aimed to establish an 
interdisciplinary, evidence-based treatment guideline for JIA based on the 
existing guideline from 2005.
METHODS: We did a systematic literature analysis in PUBMED with the key words 
"juvenile idiopathic (rheumatoid) arthritis" and "therapy". As limits in PUBMED 
we used: humans, published in the last 3 years, all child 0-18 years, clinical 
trial. Studies relating to diagnosis of JIA, Uveitis, vaccination, transition 
and rofexocibe were excluded. Authors of the 2005 guideline and representatives 
nominated by different societies were invited to attend the consensus 
conferences which were hosted by a professional moderator. Following societies 
were invited: Berufsverband der Kinder- und Jugendärzte (BVKJ), Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin (DGKJ), Deutsche Gesellschaft für 
Rheumatologie (DGRh), Deutsche Ophthalmologische Gesellschaft (DOG), Deutsche 
Rheuma-Liga Bundesverband, Verein zur Förderung und Unterstützung 
rheumatologisch erkrankter Kinder und deren Eltern, Vereinigung für 
Kinderorthopädie, Zentraler Verband der Physiotherapeuten und Krankengymnasten 
(ZVK). Consensus conferences took place in Düsseldorf on May 9th and August 1st 
2007 and were each attended by more than 95% of the nominated representatives 
Finally, statements were confirmed in a Delphi method.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Consensus statements regarding drug therapy, symptomatic 
and surgical management of JIA were compiled and judged strictly by the criteria 
of Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM).
