OBJECTIVE: The mechanisms of osteoclast maturation and the role of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) synovial fibroblasts in the control of osteoclastogenesis remain 
unclear. The purpose of this study was to determine the humoral factors that 
influence osteoclast differentiation resulting from mutual interactions between 
osteoclast progenitor cells and synovial fibroblasts.
METHODS: The cloned mouse macrophage cell line RAW 264.7 or isolated human CD14+ 
monocytes were cocultured with RA or osteoarthritis (OA) synovial fibroblasts in 
the presence of RANKL. Osteoclasts were visualized by staining for 
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), and their functions were evaluated 
by bone resorption assay. Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) and 
osteoprotegerin (OPG) levels were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. 
Expression of pSmad2 and Smad7 was analyzed by Western blotting.
RESULTS: RANKL-mediated osteoclast formation was observed in cocultures of RAW 
cells with RA synovial cells, but not with OA synovial cells. This formation was 
inhibited by TGFbeta receptor kinase inhibitor or neutralizing TGFbeta antibody. 
Human CD14+ monocytes showed the same results with RAW 264.7, and bone 
resorption activity was consistent with osteoclast formation. RA synovial 
fibroblasts produced TGFbeta in response to cell-cell contact with RAW cells in 
a RANKL-dependent manner. TGFbeta reduced OPG production by RA synovial 
fibroblasts, but dose-dependently increased OPG secretion in OA synovial 
fibroblasts. TGFbeta decreased the expression of pSmad2 and increased the 
expression of Smad7 in RA synovial fibroblasts, but not OA synovial fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Suppression of OPG production by down-regulation of TGFbeta/Smad2 
signaling may contribute to RANKL-mediated osteoclastogenesis from RA synovial 
fibroblasts.
