Osteolytic disorders cause serious problems for quality of life with aging. 
Osteolysis is performed by osteoclasts of the hematopoietic lineage that share 
some characteristics with monocytes and macrophages. As osteoclast precursors 
(pOCs) are present in peripheral blood, their characterization in osteolytic 
diseases may help us to understand risk factors. Although essential factors for 
osteoclastogenesis have been reported, the effective induction from pOCs in 
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to mature osteoclasts in 
culture requires further improvement. The aim of this study was development of 
an efficient culture system for human osteoclastogenesis and providing a simple 
system for the enrichment of pOCs from PBMCs. We employed coculturing of human 
PBMCs with a mouse stromal cell line. Significant numbers of tartrate-resistant 
acid phosphatase-positive (TRAP(+)) multinucleated osteoclasts (MNCs), which 
could resorb dentine slices, were efficiently induced in this culture condition. 
pOCs were enriched in an anti-CD16 antibody column-passed anti-CD14 
antibody-bound cell population isolated by magnetic cell sorting. We compared 
the percentage of the CD14(high) CD16(dull) cell population, which mainly 
contained pOCs in PBMCs, from age-matched patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) and osteoporosis (OP), but it was comparable. However, the mean number of 
TRAP(+) MNCs generated in cultures from PBMCs of RA was higher. In contrast, the 
frequency of pOCs in PBMCs from OP was relatively higher. These results suggest 
the characteristics of pOCs from RA and OP may be different, because single pOCs 
from OP gave rise to lower numbers of osteoclasts than those from RA.
