The contribution of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) to 
oxidative/nitrative stress is well-documented in inflammation, but difficult to 
quantify. Using a novel, recently developed assay for 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT), we 
characterized iNOS activity and its inhibition in preclinical models of 
inflammation. In particular, we utilized the 3-NT assay to assess the role of 
iNOS in the disease pathology as well as for proof of pharmacology of iNOS 
inhibitors in an acute endotoxin challenge model, in models of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) such as rat adjuvant- and collagen-induced arthritis (AIA and 
CIA) and a model of osteoarthritis (OA) such as rat sodium 
monoiodoacetate-induced arthritis (MIA). Quantification of nitrotyrosine was 
performed using immuno-affinity 2-D LC-MS/MS assay. This assay is a very 
specific and reproducible and is amenable to a number of biological fluids. 
Plasma levels of 3-NT were significantly elevated in an acute model of 
inflammation (rat LPS) and in models of rheumatoid arthritis (adjuvant- and 
collagen-induced arthritis), and osteoarthritis (monoiodoacetate-induced 
arthritis). Plasma 3-NT correlated with the severity of the inflammatory 
response; thus, a 20-fold increase was observed in the rat LPS model, a 10-fold 
increase in AIA, and only a 2.5-fold elevation in CIA. Pharmacological 
intervention with iNOS inhibitors decreased 3-NT levels and associated 
pathology. 3-NT determination allowed for better elucidation of the role of iNOS 
in RA and OA disease pathology and provided proof of pharmacology for NOS 
inhibitors in animal models of RA and OA.
