Mast cell development is an important component of atopic and chronic 
inflammatory diseases such as asthma, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
and atherosclerosis. In this study, we found that IL-4 and IL-10 were produced 
constitutively in cultures of developing mast cells, correlating with mast cell 
purity. Deletion of either gene increased mast cell numbers and Fc epsilon RI 
expression during culture in IL-3 + stem cell factor (SCF). By adding exogenous 
IL-4 and IL-10 to bone marrow (BM) cultures containing IL-3 + SCF, we found that 
IL-4 + IL-10 suppressed mast cell development through mechanisms not used by 
either cytokine alone. IL-4 + IL-10 elicited a rapid cell death coincidental 
with reduced Kit receptor expression and signaling and enhanced mitochondrial 
damage and caspase activation. IL-4 or IL-10 costimulation, unlike either 
cytokine alone, altered mast cell ontogeny to yield predominantly macrophages in 
cultures that typically produce mast cells. This effect was observed 
consistently with unseparated BM cells, purified mouse BM stem cells, and 
erythrocyte-depleted human umbilical cord blood cells. These experiments 
demonstrated a major role for Stat6 and Stat3, but not the Stat3-induced 
transcriptional repressor Ets variant gene 3. Genetic background was also a 
critical factor, as BALB/c-derived BM cells were completely resistant to 
IL-10-mediated killing and expressed lower levels of IL-10R. Collectively, these 
results support the theory that IL-4 and IL-10 function as endogenous regulators 
of mast cell progenitor development, consistent with a role in immune 
homeostasis. Loss of this homeostasis, perhaps via genetic polymorphism, could 
contribute to the etiology of mast cell-associated disease.
