Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) treatment provides diverse anti-inflammatory 
benefits in rodent models of diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but 
only limited benefits to patients. In rodents, DHEA is metabolized to (among 
others) androstene-3beta,7beta,17beta-triol (AET), which retains potent 
anti-inflammatory activity. 
17Alpha-ethynyl-5-androstene-3beta,7beta,17beta-triol (HE3286) is a novel, 
metabolically stabilized, orally bioavailable derivative of AET. In the DBA 
mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), once-daily oral treatments 
(gavage) with HE3286 (40 mg/kg), beginning at onset of disease, significantly 
decreased disease. Benefit was associated with reduction in joint inflammation, 
erosion, and synovial proliferation as measured by histological analysis and 
mRNA of proinflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor-alpha, 
interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1beta, and IL-23. Significant benefit was also observed 
in the CIA model even when treatments were delayed until 7 days after the onset 
of arthritis. Furthermore, dose-dependent benefit was observed in the DBA mouse 
model of collagen antibody-induced arthritis, as well as reductions in IL-6 and 
matrix metalloproteinase-3 mRNA levels in joints at the peak of disease and at 
the end of the study. HE3286, in contrast to dexamethasone, was not 
immune-suppressive in several classic animal models of immune function. Instead, 
HE3286 treatment was associated with reduced nuclear factor-kappaB activation 
and in our previous studies, with increased regulatory T cells. We hypothesize 
that HE3286 may represent a novel, perhaps first-in-class, anti-inflammatory 
agent and may more fully translate the benefits of DHEA, heretofore largely 
limited to rodents, into treatments for human diseases, including autoimmune 
disorders such as RA.
