Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease. The generation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) within an inflamed joint has been suggested as 
playing a significant pathogenic role. Extracellular superoxide dismutase 
(EC-SOD) is a major scavenger enzyme of ROS, which has received growing 
attention for its therapeutic potential. To investigate the therapeutic effect 
of EC-SOD in mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), we used mouse embryonic 
fibroblast (MEF) of transgenic mice that overexpresses EC-SOD on the skin by 
using hK14 promoter. DBA/1 mice that had been treated with bovine type II 
collagen were administrated subcutaneous injections of EC-SOD transgenic MEF 
(each at 1.4 x 10(60 cells) on days 28, 35, and 42 after primary immunization. 
To test EC-SOD activity, blood samples were collected in each group on day 49. 
The EC-SOD activity was nearly 1.5-fold higher in the transgenic MEF-treated 
group than in the nontransgenic MEF-treated group (p < 0.05). The severity of 
arthritis in mice was scored in a double-blind manner, with each paw being 
assigned a separate clinical score. The severity of arthritis in EC-SOD 
transgenic MEF-treated mice was significantly suppressed in the arthritic 
clinical score (p < 0.05). To investigate the alteration of cytokine levels, 
ELISA was used to measure blood samples. Levels of IL-1beta and TNF-alpha were 
reduced in the transgenic MEF-treated group (p < 0.05). Abnormalities of the 
joints were examined by H&E staining. There were no signs of inflammation except 
for mild hyperplasia of the synovium in the transgenic MEF-treated group. The 
proliferation of CII-specific T cells was lower in the transgenic MEF-treated 
mice than in those in the other groups. The transfer of EC-SOD transgenic MEF 
has shown a therapeutic effect in CIA mice and this approach may be a safer and 
more effective form of therapy for rheumatoid arthritis.
