OBJECTIVE: To explore the therapeutic potential of CD147/HAb18 mAb in the 
treatment of RA in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice engrafted with 
human cartilage and rheumatoid synovium tissue (SCID-HuRAg).
METHODS: SCID-HuRAg mice were treated separately with CD147/HAb18 mAb, 
anti-TNF-alpha mAb or a combination of both. The mice in control group were 
treated with anti-Japanese encephalitis virus mAb. The volume of engrafts was 
measured and the number of inflammatory cells and cartilage erosion score were 
examined. Expression of MMP-2, -3 and -9 was determined by immunohistochemistry. 
Human inflammatory cytokine levels in mouse sera were assessed using cytometric 
bead array kit.
RESULTS: The volume of engrafts decreased significantly in SCID-HuRAg mice 
treated separately with anti-CD147 mAb or anti-TNF-alpha mAb, and in the mice 
treated with anti-CD147 mAb plus anti-TNF-alpha mAb (P < 0.05). Significant 
reduction was observed in cartilage erosion score in anti-CD147 treatment group 
and combined treatment group (P < 0.05). Immunohistochemical analysis showed 
that expression of MMP-2, -3 and -9 was lower in the anti-CD147 treatment group 
and combined treatment group than in the control mAb group (P < 0.05). Moreover, 
the level of TNF-alpha, IL-6 and -8 in CD147 mAb group showed a significant 
decrease compared with that of the control mAb group (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: CD147/HAb18 mAb can reduce cartilage erosion and synovitis by 
inhibition of the MMPs and reduction of inflammatory cytokines in SCID-HuRAg 
mice, which suggests that CD147/HAb18 mAb is a promising treatment option for RA 
patients.
