Overgrowth of the synovium plays an important role in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) is one of the 
most potent mitogenic factors of synovial cells, and imatinib mesylate 
(imatinib) is a specific inhibitor of the PDGF receptor tyrosine kinase. The aim 
of this study was to elucidate the anti-rheumatic activity of imatinib. The in 
vivo effects of imatinib were assessed by evaluating the sequential 
manifestation of adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats using paw volume and 
clinical scores. Imatinib was found to inhibit rat adjuvant-induced arthritis, 
but the inhibitory effects were incomplete. To confirm the mechanism of 
anti-rheumatic-activity of imatinib, we assessed the in vitro effects of 
imatinib on the proliferation of RA synovial fibroblast-like cells (RASFs) using 
a MTT assay. Intracellular signaling of PDGF was evaluated by Western blot 
analysis. Platelet-derived growth factor was found to induce a significant 
proliferation of RASFs, while imatinib inhibited PDGF-induced proliferation of 
RASF. Imatinib also inhibited PDGF-induced phosphorylation of the PDGF receptor 
and Akt, whereas constitutive activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
was not inhibited by imatinib. In contrast, imatinib did not inhibit 
transforming growth factor beta- and basic fibroblast growth factor-induced 
proliferation of RASF. Oral administration of imatinib ameliorated 
adjuvant-induced arthritis in rats, and it inhibited PDGF-induced RASF 
proliferation through disruption of the PDGF-R to Akt kinase signaling pathway. 
Because imatinib cannot inhibit the non-PDGF-dependent proliferation of RASFs, 
the anti-rheumatic effect of imatinib may be incomplete. The development of 
inhibitors of RASF proliferation may lead to the successful treatment of RA.
