We have previously shown that inhibitors of IkappaB kinase beta (IKKbeta), 
including 4(2'-aminoethyl)amino-1,8-dimethylimidazo(1,2-a)quinoxaline 
(BMS-345541), are efficacious against experimental arthritis in rodents. In our 
efforts to identify an analog as a clinical candidate for the treatment of 
autoimmune and inflammatory disorders, we have discovered the potent and highly 
selective IKKbeta inhibitor 
2-methoxy-N-((6-(1-methyl-4-(methylamino)-1,6-dihydroimidazo[4,5-d]pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridin-7-yl)pyridin-2-yl)methyl)acetamide 
(BMS-066). Investigations of its pharmacology in rodent models of experimental 
arthritis showed that BMS-066 at doses of 5 and 10 mg/kg once daily was 
effective at protecting rats against adjuvant-induced arthritis, despite showing 
only weak inhibition at 10 mg/kg against a pharmacodymanic model of tumor 
necrosis factor alpha production in rats challenged with lipopolysaccharide. The 
duration of exposure in rats indicated that just 6 to 9 h of coverage per day of 
the concentration necessary to inhibit IKKbeta by 50% in vivo was necessary for 
protection against arthritis. Similar findings were observed in the mouse 
collagen-induced arthritis model, with efficacy observed at a dose providing 
only 6 h of coverage per day of the concentration necessary to inhibit IKKbeta 
by 50%. This finding probably results from the cumulative effect on multiple 
cellular mechanisms that contribute to autoimmunity and joint destruction, 
because BMS-066 was shown to inhibit a broad spectrum of activities such as T 
cell proliferation, B cell function, cytokine and interleukin secretion from 
monocytes, T(H)17 cell function and regulation, and osteoclastogenesis. Thus, 
only partial and transient inhibition of IKKbeta is sufficient to yield dramatic 
benefit in vivo, and this understanding will be important in the clinical 
development of IKKbeta inhibitors.
