INTRODUCTION: The objective was to study immune regulation in a mouse model of 
rheumatoid arthritis that exhibits considerable heterogeneity of disease 
activity.
METHODS: T-cell receptor transgenic mice, in which nearly all CD4+ T cells 
recognize a single peptide of type II collagen, were immunized with collagen and 
observed for development of arthritis for 4 weeks. At 28 days post-immunization, 
splenocytes were analyzed by flow cytometry and in vitro assays for markers of 
immune activation and regulation.
RESULTS: Disease severities ranging from 0 to 12 (on a 12-point scale) were 
observed. Among splenic lymphocyte populations, only the CD5+ B-cell subset 
displayed a decrease in relative numbers as arthritis severity increased. 
Splenic CD5+ B cells expressed higher levels of Fas ligand (FasL) than did CD4+ 
T cells or CD5- B cells in all mice, and antigen-dependent T-cell death 
correlated with higher levels of CD5+ B cells in cocultures. Ratios of 
interleukin (IL)-17 to interferon-gamma production were higher in antigen-driven 
cultures of splenocytes from severely arthritic mice compared to mildly or 
nonarthritic mice. A correlation was established between the reduced production 
of IL-17 in antigen-driven T-cell/B-cell cocultures and FasL, but not IL-10. 
Confirmation of the direct killing effect of B cells on T cells was demonstrated 
using an antigen-specific T hybridoma cell line.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced numbers of splenic FasL+ CD5+ B cells correlated with 
increasing arthritis severity and decreased T-cell death in a T-cell receptor 
transgenic mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis. These 'killer' B cells may 
provide a novel mechanism for inducing T-cell death as a treatment for 
arthritis.
