Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by inflammation and cellular 
proliferation in the synovial lining of joints that result in cartilage and bone 
destruction. Although the etiology of RA is unclear, activated lymphocytes and 
proinflammatory molecules, in particular TNF superfamily members, have been 
implicated in the disease pathology. A TNF superfamily member, CD70, is found on 
activated lymphocytes and shown to be important in memory and effector responses 
of lymphocytes. CD70 is expressed at high levels on chronically activated T 
cells in patients with autoimmune disorders, including RA. The involvement of 
CD70 in the progression of RA, however, remains unknown. In this study, we 
report effects of targeting CD70 on disease pathogenesis by using an anti-mouse 
CD70 Ab in a murine model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). In addition to 
blocking CD70 binding to its receptor CD27, the anti-CD70 Ab used also engages 
Fc-dependent effector functions including Ab-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, 
phagocytosis, and complement fixation. Treatment of mice with anti-CD70 Ab both 
before the onset or after the established disease in CIA model resulted in 
marked improvements in disease severity and significant reduction in the 
production of autoantibodies. Histopathological analyses of the joints of mice 
revealed a substantial reduction of inflammation, and bone and cartilage 
destruction in response to the anti-CD70 Ab treatment. These results uncover a 
novel role for CD27-CD70 interactions in the regulation of in vivo inflammatory 
response leading to arthritis, and provide a molecular basis to support the 
rationale for anti-CD70 therapy for autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
