Scopoletin is the main constituent of coumarin found in the stems of Erycibe 
obtusifolia Benth, a traditional Chinese medicine used in the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis. We have previously demonstrated that scopoletin is able to 
decrease the serum level of uric acid in hyperuricemic mice induced by potassium 
oxonate, and attenuate croton oil-induced inflammation. In the present study, we 
evaluated the anti-arthritic effects of scopoletin in rat adjuvant-induced 
arthritis by assessing paw swelling, pathology, and synovial angiogenesis. It 
was found that scopoletin, injected intraperitoneally at doses of 50, 100 mg/kg, 
reduced both inoculated and non-inoculated paw swelling as well as articular 
index scores, and elevated the mean body weight of adjuvant-induced arthritic 
rats. Rats treated with higher dose of scopoletin showed a near-normal 
histological architecture of the joints and a reduced new blood vessel formation 
in the synovial tissues. Furthermore, scopoletin downregulated the 
overexpression of vascular endothelial growth factor, basic fibroblast growth 
factor and interleukin 6 in the synovial tissues of adjuvant-induced arthritic 
rats. In conclusion, scopoletin is capable of ameliorating clinical symptoms of 
rat adjuvant-induced arthritis, by reducing numbers of new blood vessels in the 
synovium and the production of important endogenous angiogenic inducers. 
Therefore, this compound may be a potential agent for angiogenesis-related 
diseases and could serve as a structural base for screening more potent 
synthetic analogs.
