BACKGROUND: A pathogenic hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is persistent 
inflammatory responses in target tissues and organs. Immune responses mediated 
by T cells and autoantibodies are known to play pivotal roles. A possible 
interpretation for this observation is a loss of negative regulation of 
autoimmune responses. Here we sought to investigate whether B7-H4, a cell 
surface inhibitory molecule of the B7-CD28 signaling pathway, may play a role in 
the pathogenesis of RA.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: In a cross-sectional study of a clinical convenience 
sample using monoclonal antibodies against human B7-H4 molecules, we detected 
high levels of the soluble form of B7-H4 (sH4) in the sera of 65% of patients 
with RA (n = 68) versus only 13% of healthy donors (n = 24). Elevated sH4 was 
associated with an increased disease severity score (DAS28) in a cross-sectional 
analysis. In a mouse model of RA, transgenic expression of sH4 or genetic 
deletion of B7-H4 accelerated the progression of collagen-induced arthritis, 
accompanied by enhanced T and B cell-mediated autoimmune responses as well as 
increased activity of neutrophils. Expression in vivo of an agonist, a 
B7-H4-immunoglobulin Fc fusion protein, profoundly suppressed disease 
progression in the mouse model.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings in mice indicate that sH4 acts as a decoy molecule to 
block the inhibitory functions of cell-surface B7-H4, leading to exacerbation of 
collagen-induced arthritis. If the preliminary correlation between sH4 levels 
and disease activity in patients with RA can be confirmed to reflect a similar 
mechanism, these findings suggest a novel target for treatment approaches. 
Please see later in the article for the Editors' Summary.
