INTRODUCTION: Interleukin (IL)-17 plays an important role in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis and the mouse model collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). 
Interferon(IFN)-gamma and IL-4 have been shown to suppress Th17 development in 
vitro, but their potential immunoregulatory roles in vivo are uncertain. The 
goals of this study were to determine the relationship between Th17 responses 
and disease severity in CIA and to assess regulation of IL-17 by endogenous 
IFN-gamma and IL-4.
METHODS: DBA1/LacJ mice were immunized with type II collagen in complete 
Freund's adjuvant (CFA) to induce arthritis, and treated with neutralizing 
antibody to IFN-gamma and/or IL-4. Systemic IL-17, IFN-gamma, and IL-4 were 
measured in serum. At the peak of disease, cytokine production was measured by 
ELISA of supernatants from spleen, lymph node and paw cultures. Paws were also 
scored for histologic severity of arthritis.
RESULTS: Joint inflammation was associated with a higher ratio of systemic 
IL-17/IFN-gamma. Neutralization of IFN-gamma accelerated the course of CIA and 
was associated with increased IL-17 levels in the serum and joints. The 
IFN-gamma/IL-4/IL-17 responses in the lymphoid organ were distinct from such 
responses in the joints. Neutralization of IL-4 led to increased arthritis only 
in the absence of IFN-gamma and was associated with increased bone and cartilage 
damage without an increase in the levels of IL-17.
CONCLUSIONS: IL-4 and IFN-gamma both play protective roles in CIA, but through 
different mechanisms. Our data suggests that the absolute level of IL-17 is not 
the only determinant of joint inflammation. Instead, the balance of Th1, Th2 and 
Th17 cytokines control the immune events leading to joint inflammation.
