Etanercept (ETN), which is a recombinant human soluble tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) receptor that inhibits TNF activity, is effective in the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis. We investigated the effect of ETN on recombinant human 
bone morphogenetic protein-2 (rhBMP-2)-induced ectopic bone formation in vivo. A 
block copolymer composed of poly-D,L-lactic acid with random insertion of 
p-dioxanone and polyethylene glycol (PLA-DX-PEG polymer) was used as the 
delivery system. Polymer discs (6 mm, 30 mg) containing 5 microg rhBMP-2 were 
implanted into the left dorsal muscle pouch of mice (n = 50). In the systemic 
administration groups (n = 5 per group), ETN was subcutaneously injected (25 
mg/human = 12.5 microg/mouse) twice per week in a dose-dependent manner 
(placebo, 12.5 x 10(-3), 12.5 x 10(-1), 12.5, 125 microg), whereas a single dose 
of ETN (placebo, 12.5 x 10(-3), 12.5 x 10(-1), 12.5, 125 microg) was embedded in 
each rhBMP-2 polymer disc in the local administration groups (n = 5 per group). 
Three weeks after implantation, the mice were killed and the implants were 
analyzed. Implants in the optimally dosed groups had increased radiodensity, 
which was consistent with a significant increase in bone mineral content of the 
ossicles. Bone histomorphology revealed a significant increase in bone 
volume/total volume, number of osteoblasts, osteoblast surface/bone surface, and 
a significant decrease in the number of osteoclasts, osteoclast surface/bone 
surface in the optimal dosed systemic and locally administered groups. These 
data suggest that the optimal dose of ETN, administered either systemically or 
locally, enhanced the bone-inducing capacity of BMP with no apparent adverse 
systemic effects.
