The treatment of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) with conventional 
immunosuppressive drugs has been relatively disappointing and there have been 
few efforts in defining a role for the newer biological agents useful in 
rheumatoid arthritis and other systemic autoimmune diseases. In this study we 
took advantage of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) receptor II 
dominant negative (dnTGF-betaRII) mice, a mouse model of autoimmune cholangitis, 
to address the therapeutic efficacy of B-cell depletion using anti-CD20. Mice 
were treated at either 4-6 weeks of age or beginning at 20-22 weeks of age with 
intraperitoneal injections of anti-CD20 every 2 weeks. We quantitated B-cell 
levels in all mice as well as antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA), serum and 
hepatic levels of proinflammatory cytokines, and histopathology of liver and 
colon. In mice whose treatment was initiated at 4-6 weeks of age, anti-CD20 
therapy demonstrated a significantly lower incidence of liver inflammation 
associated with reduced numbers of activated hepatic CD8(+) T cells. However, 
colon inflammation was exacerbated. In contrast, in mice treated at 20-22 weeks 
of age, anti-CD20 therapy had relatively little effect on either liver or colon 
disease. As expected, all treated animals had reduced levels of B cells, absence 
of AMA, and increased levels in sera of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), 
interleukin 6 (IL-6), and chemokine (C-C motif) ligand (CCL2) (monocyte 
chemoattractant protein 1 [MCP-1]).
CONCLUSION: These data suggest potential usage of anti-CD20 in early PBC 
resistant to other modalities, but raise a cautionary note regarding the use of 
anti-CD20 in inflammatory bowel disease.
