Methotrexate (MTX) is an anti-metabolite, widely used in the cancer chemotherapy 
and rheumatoid arthritis. However, its long-term clinical use is restricted on 
account of its severe intestinal toxicity. The present study was aimed to 
investigate the intestinal toxicity of MTX and the possible protective effect of 
alpha-lipoic acid (LA) on Sprague-Dawley rats. MTX-induced intestinal toxicity 
was evaluated at the dose of 2.5mg/kg for short-term (5 days treatment) and 
1mg/kg for long-term (5 days in a week for four consecutive weeks treatment) 
study. The possible protective effect of LA was evaluated in both short- as well 
as long-term study in a dose-dependent manner. MTX treatment induced diarrhoea 
and mortality in rats, indicating its severe toxicity in the target organ of 
investigation, i.e., intestine. Further, the intestinal toxicity of MTX was 
assessed by evaluating different parameters of oxidative stress, DNA damage, 
cytotoxicity as well as histological changes. Immunostaining for p53 revealed 
higher genotoxic assault in the intestinal cells due to MTX treatment. 
Pretreatment of rats with LA led to significant decrease in the oxidative 
stress, DNA damage, cellular damage, inflammatory changes and apoptosis as 
determined by malondialdehyde level, glutathione level, comet assay parameters, 
histological evaluation, immunostaining and terminal deoxynucleotidyl 
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay. In the present 
investigation, we report that LA pretreatment ameliorates MTX-induced intestinal 
toxicity in rat as evident from the protection against oxidative stress, 
decrease in DNA damage and protection of cellular morphology as well as 
improvement in the stool consistency and animal survival rate.
