INTRODUCTION: Immunosuppressants, including anti-TNFalpha antibodies, have 
remarkable effects in rheumatoid arthritis; however, they increase infectious 
events. The present study was designed to examine the effects and immunological 
change of action of altered peptide ligands (APLs) on glucose-6-phosphate 
isomerase (GPI) peptide-induced arthritis.
METHODS: DBA/1 mice were immunized with hGPI325-339, and cells of draining lymph 
node (DLN) were stimulated with hGPI325-339 to investigate the T-cell receptor 
(TCR) repertoire of antigen-specific CD4+ T cells by flow cytometry. Twenty 
types of APLs with one amino acid substitution at a TCR contact site of 
hGPI325-339 were synthesized. CD4+ T cells primed with human GPI and 
antigen-presenting cells were co-cultured with each APL and cytokine production 
was measured by ELISA to identify antagonistic APLs. Antagonistic APLs were 
co-immunized with hGPI325-339 to investigate whether arthritis could be 
antigen-specifically inhibited by APL. After co-immunization, DLN cells were 
stimulated with hGPI325-339 or APL to investigate Th17 and regulatory T-cell 
population by flow cytometry, and anti-mouse GPI antibodies were measured by 
ELISA.
RESULTS: Human GPI325-339-specific Th17 cells showed predominant usage of 
TCRVbeta8.1 8.2. Among the 20 synthesized APLs, four (APL 6; N329S, APL 7; 
N329T, APL 12; G332A, APL 13; G332V) significantly reduced IL-17 production by 
CD4+ T cells in the presence of hGPI325-339. Co-immunization with each 
antagonistic APL markedly prevented the development of arthritis, especially APL 
13 (G332V). Although co-immunization with APL did not affect the population of 
Th17 and regulatory T cells, the titers of anti-mouse GPI antibodies in mice 
co-immunized with APL were significantly lower than in those without APL.
CONCLUSIONS: We prepared antagonistic APLs that antigen-specifically inhibited 
the development of experimental arthritis. Understanding the inhibitory 
mechanisms of APLs may pave the way for the development of novel therapies for 
arthritis induced by autoimmune responses to ubiquitous antigens.
