Leukotrienes (LTs) belong to a large family of lipid mediators, termed 
eicosanoids, which are derived from arachidonic acids and released from the cell 
membrane by phospholipases. LTs are involved in the pathogenesis of inflammatory 
diseases, such as asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, and peripheral inflammatory 
pain. In the present study, we examined whether LTs were implicated in 
pathomechanism of neuropathic pain following peripheral nerve injury. Using the 
spared nerve injury (SNI) model in rats, we investigated the expression of LT 
synthases (5-lipoxygenase; 5-LO, Five lipoxygenase activating protein; FLAP, 
LTA4 hydrolase; LTA4h and LTC4 synthase; LTC4s) and receptors (BLT1, 2 and 
CysLT1, 2) mRNAs in the rat spinal cord. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed that 
5-LO, FLAP, LTC4s, BLT1, and CysLT1 mRNAs increased following SNI, but not 
CysLT2 mRNAs. Using double labeling analysis of in situ hybridization with 
immunohistochemistry, we observed that 5-LO, FLAP, and CysLT1 mRNAs were 
expressed in spinal microglia. LTA4h and LTC4s mRNAs were expressed in both 
spinal neurons and microglia. BLT1 mRNA was expressed in spinal neurons. The p38 
mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibitor, but not MEK inhibitor, reduced the 
increase in 5-LO in spinal microglia. Continuous intrathecal administration of 
the 5-LO inhibitor or BLT1 and CysLT1 receptor antagonists suppressed mechanical 
allodynia induced by SNI. Our findings suggest that the increase of LT synthesis 
in spinal microglia produced via p38 MAPK plays a role in the generation of 
neuropathic pain.
