The recruitment of osteoclast precursors toward osteoblasts and subsequent 
cell-cell interactions are critical for osteoclast differentiation. Chemokines 
are known to regulate cell migration and adhesion. CX3CL1 (also called 
fractalkine) is a unique membrane-bound chemokine that has dual functions for 
cells expressing its receptor CX3CR1: a potent chemotactic factor in its soluble 
form and a type of efficient cell adhesion molecule in its membrane-bound form. 
In this paper, we demonstrate a novel role of CX3CL1 in osteoblast-induced 
osteoclast differentiation. We found that osteoclast precursors selectively 
expressed CX3CR1, whereas CX3CL1 is expressed by osteoblasts. We confirmed that 
soluble CX3CL1 induced migration of bone marrow cells containing osteoclast 
precursors, whereas immobilized CX3CL1 mediated firm adhesion of osteoclast 
precursors. Furthermore, a blocking mAb against CX3CL1 efficiently inhibited 
osteoclast differentiation in mouse bone marrow cells cocultured with 
osteoblasts. Anti-CX3CL1 also significantly suppressed bone resorption in 
neonatal mice by reducing the number of bone-resorbing mature osteoclasts. 
Collectively, CX3CL1 expressed by osteoblasts plays an important role in 
osteoclast differentiation, possibly through its dual functions as a chemotactic 
factor and adhesion molecule for osteoclast precursors expressing CX3CR1. The 
CX3CL1-CX3CR1 axis may be a novel target for the therapeutic intervention of 
bone resorbing diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis, and cancer 
bone metastasis.
