This study focused on the potential therapeutic effect of tumor necrosis 
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) on collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) and on the elucidation of the mechanisms involved. DBA/1J mice with 
established CIA were treated with various amount of recombinant soluble human 
TRAIL. The effects of TRAIL on the development and severity of CIA in this 
DBA/1J mouse model were assessed clinically and histologically, and a detailed 
investigation was conducted on proinflammatory cytokine and 
anticollagen-specific antibody levels. Cellular immunity was evaluated by 
investigating the proliferative responses and cytokine release profiles of 
splenocytes after TRAIL treatment. TRAIL treatment significantly reduced the 
severity and incidence of CIA, joint swelling, erythema, and edema. Histologic 
evaluations revealed that inflammatory cell infiltration, cartilage destruction, 
and bone erosion were significantly reduced in joints of TRAIL-treated mice with 
dose-dependent manner. TRAIL treatment also strongly decreased and/or normalized 
the productions of proinflammatory cytokines and of anti-collagen-specific 
antibodies in the sera of CIA mice. Furthermore, in vitro studies with primary 
splenocytes showed the cytotoxic effect of TRAIL on activated lymphocytes, with 
reduction of inflammatory cytokine release. These findings show that TRAIL 
administration is an effective anti-inflammatory treatment that prevents the 
development and progression of CIA in DBA/1J mice, and they suggest that TRAIL 
might be considered a potential treatment for human RA.
