OBJECTIVE: In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), integrins mediate cell adhesion, 
migration, and invasion, and their expression is regulated by cytokines and 
growth factors. The aim of this study was to investigate whether hormones such 
as cortisol or other steroids can influence integrin expression and function in 
the synovial cells of patients with RA.
METHODS: We performed immunofluorescence and fluorescence-activated cell sorting 
analyses to quantify surface integrin levels. Adhesion and migration assays were 
performed to study the function of synovial fibroblasts (SFs). ERK activation 
was measured by cellular activation of a signaling enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay. Invasion of SFs into cartilage was determined in the SCID mouse 
coimplantation model of RA in vivo.
RESULTS: In RA, expression of integrin subunits alpha5, alphav, and beta1 was 
higher at the site of invasion compared with the sublining zone. Testosterone 
and 17beta-estradiol had no influence on integrin levels, but cortisol 
up-regulated expression of the alpha5 subunit in a time-dependent and 
dose-dependent manner. In addition, cortisol increased the adhesion of SFs to 
fibronectin and inhibited ERK signaling upon integrin activation or upon 
stimulation with tumor necrosis factor. Small interfering RNA or a neutralizing 
antibody to alpha5 integrin increased SF migration, indicating that up-regulated 
alpha5 integrin is responsible for an immobile phenotype. In addition, in the 
SCID mouse model, SF invasion into cartilage was attenuated by glucocorticoid 
treatment in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Glucocorticoids increase integrin expression and the adhesion of 
cells to fibronectin, inhibit ERK signaling, and down-regulate the invasiveness 
of SFs in vivo. This study demonstrates that an important antiinflammatory 
aspect of glucocorticoids is regulating the expression and function of alpha5 
integrin.
