OBJECTIVE: To map hypoxic areas in arthritic synovium and to establish the 
relevance of low oxygen levels to the phenotype of synovial fibroblasts, with 
special focus on bone degradation.
METHODS: To analyze the distribution of hypoxia in arthritic joints, the hypoxia 
marker EF5 was administered to mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). To 
evaluate the effect of hypoxia on rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblasts 
(RASFs), reverse suppression subtractive hybridization and complementary DNA 
array were used. Real-time polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting, and 
immunohistochemistry were used to evaluate the expression of inhibitor of DNA 
binding/differentiation 2 (ID-2). To investigate the function of ID-2 in RASFs, 
cells were transfected either with ID-2 vector or with ID-2-specific small 
interfering RNA.
RESULTS: EF5 staining showed the presence of hypoxia in arthritic joints, 
particularly at sites of synovial invasion into bone. Differential expression 
analysis revealed that ID-2 was strongly induced by hypoxia in RASFs. 
Immunohistochemical analysis of CIA mouse synovium and human RA synovium showed 
a strong expression of ID-2 by RASFs at sites of synovial invasion into bone. 
Overexpression of ID-2 in RASFs significantly induced the expression of several 
factors promoting osteoclastogenesis. The biologic relevance of the potent 
osteoclastogenesis-promoting effects was shown by coculture assays of 
ID-2-overexpressing RASFs with bone marrow cells, leading to an increased 
differentiation of osteoclasts from bone marrow precursors.
CONCLUSION: The data show that hypoxic conditions are present at sites of 
inflammation and synovial invasion into bone in arthritic synovium. 
Hypoxia-induced ID-2 may contribute to joint destruction in RA patients by 
promoting synovial fibroblast-dependent osteoclastogenesis.
