BACKGROUND: Drug resistance mediated by P-glycoprotein (P-gp) is one of the 
major reasons for the failure of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) therapy with disease 
modifying anti-rheumatic drugs and glucocorticoids. In the present study, we 
aimed to investigate the in vitro effectiveness of small interfering RNA (siRNA) 
to render rat fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) susceptible to drugs. We also 
attempted the electroporation-mediated transfer of siRNA against multidrug 
resistance (MDR) genes into rat knee joints.
METHODS: FLS were transfected with siRNAs corresponding to MDR1a and MDR1b 
genes. FLS were treated with dexamethasone (DEX) and lipopolysaccharide. The 
mRNA and protein levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin (IL)-6 and 
IL-1beta were measured. Both siRNAs were co-transduced into rat knee joints by 
an electroporation method and evaluated the target gene expressions in the 
synovium.
RESULTS: Each siRNA could sequence-specifically reduce the target gene 
expression by over 70% and effectively suppressed P-gp expression and function 
in the FLS. Both gene expression and protein production of the inflammatory 
cytokines in the cells transfected with siRNA were reduced by a greater amount 
compared to in control cells. The in vivo electroporation-mediated transduction 
of siRNA could significantly inhibit the target gene expressions.
CONCLUSIONS: MDR1a/1b gene silencing by siRNA could effectively inhibit P-gp in 
rat FLS, resulting in a significant enhancement of the anti-inflammatory effects 
of DEX. The in vivo siRNA transduction could successfully silence MDR gene 
expression in the rat synovium. These findings indicate that the siRNA targeting 
MDR gene could be a useful tool for treating refractory arthritis in RA.
