The 'A-disintegrin and metalloproteinase' ( ADAM ) and 'A-disintegrin and 
metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs' ( ADAMTS ) genes make up two 
similar, yet distinct, gene families. The human and mouse genomes contain 21 and 
24 putatively functional protein-coding ADAM genes, respectively, and 24 versus 
32 putatively functional protein-coding ADAMTS genes, respectively. Analysis of 
evolutionary divergence shows that both families are unique. Each of the two 
families can be separated, if need be, into groups of more closely related 
members: six subfamilies for ADAM , four subfamilies for ADAMTS. The presence of 
both disintegrin and peptidase domains within the ADAM and ADAMTS proteins 
implies multiple biological roles within the cell. Membrane-anchored ADAM 
proteins are best known for their role in activating zymogens--including tumour 
necrosis factor-alpha, epidermal growth factor (EGF) and amyloid precursor 
protein (APP). ADAM proteins can also participate in cell adhesion via their 
interaction with integrins in neighbouring cells. ADAMTS are secreted proteins 
that participate in extracellular matrix maintenance by way of their cleavage of 
procollagen and proteoglycans. ADAMTS proteins also are involved in coagulation 
by cleaving von Willibrand factor precursor protein. ADAM and ADAMTS proteins 
participate in a wide range of cellular processes, including cell adhesion and 
migration, ectodomain shedding, proteolysis, development, ovulation and 
angiogenesis. Because these enzymes are believed to play an important role in a 
number of pathologies, including Alzheimer's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, 
atherosclerosis, asthma and cancer progression, the products of the ADAM and 
ADAMTS genes represent promising drug targets for the prevention and management 
of a number of human diseases.
