INTRODUCTION: Glucocorticoids have extensively been used in the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases. However, their 
side-effects remain the major limitation in clinical use and an improved 
therapeutic index is needed.
METHODS: Therapeutic efficacy and persistence of free and liposomal 
dexamethasone phosphate (DXM-P) were determined in mouse collagen-induced 
arthritis. For regimens with equal therapeutic benefit, the side-effect profiles 
were analysed over time with respect to collagen breakdown, suppression of the 
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, changes in blood glucose levels and 
the haematological profile. In addition, the presence of drug was monitored in 
plasma.
RESULTS: Liposomal DXM-P, but not free drug, resulted in a persistent 
anti-inflammatory effect. Comparable clinical benefit was achieved with a single 
administration of 4 mg/kg liposomal DXM-P or daily administrations of 1.6 mg/kg 
free drug for at least 7 days. For the liposomal form, but not for the free 
form, we observed a limitation of the suppression of the HPA axis in time and an 
absence of the drug-induced gluconeogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Liposomal DXM-P, but not free DXM-P, achieves therapeutic 
persistence in mouse collagen-induced arthritis, which results in drug-free 
periods of therapeutic benefit. The physical absence of drug after day 2 is 
associated with a reduction of the typical glucocorticoid side-effects profile. 
Liposomal DXM-P thereby has an improved therapeutic window.
