OBJECTIVE: Evaluation of the efficacy of green tea extract (GTE) in regulating 
chemokine production and chemokine receptor expression in human RA synovial 
fibroblasts and rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA).
METHODS: Fibroblasts isolated from human RA synovium were used in the study. 
Regulated upon activation normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES)/CCL5, 
monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1/CCL2, growth-regulated oncogene 
(GRO)alpha/CXCL1 and IL-8/CXCL8 production was measured by ELISA. Western 
blotting was used to study the phosphorylation of protein kinase C (PKC)delta 
and c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK). Chemokine and chemokine receptor expression 
was determined by quantitative RT-PCR. The benefit of GTE administration in rat 
AIA was determined.
RESULTS: GTE (2.5-40 microg/ml) inhibited IL-1beta-induced MCP-1/CCL2 (10 
ng/ml), RANTES/CCL5, GROalpha/CXCL1 and IL-8/CXCL8 production in human RA 
synovial fibroblasts (P < 0.05). However, GTE inhibited MCP-1/CCL2 and 
GROalpha/CXCL1 mRNA synthesis in RA synovial fibroblasts. Furthermore, GTE also 
inhibited IL-1beta-induced phosphorylation of PKCdelta, the signalling pathway 
mediating IL-1beta-induced chemokine production. Interestingly, GTE 
preincubation enhanced constitutive and IL-1beta-induced CCR1, CCR2b, CCR5, 
CXCR1 and CXCR2 receptor expression. GTE administration (200 mg/kg/day p.o.) 
modestly ameliorated rat AIA, which was accompanied by a decrease in MCP-1/CCL2 
and GROalpha/CXCL1 levels and enhanced CCR-1, -2, -5 and CXCR1 receptor 
expression in the joints of GTE administered rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Chemokine receptor overexpression with reduced chemokine production 
by GTE may be one potential mechanism to limit the overall inflammation and 
joint destruction in RA.
