The mouse model of collagen induced arthritis (CIA) effectively mimics human 
disease and thus is useful for testing and development of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA) therapies. We developed a Ligand Epitope Antigen Presentation System 
(LEAPS) peptide hetero-conjugate vaccine containing an epitope of human collagen 
type II (CEL-2000) that acted as a therapeutic vaccine in the collagen induced 
arthritis (CIA) mouse model. LEAPS technology converts a small peptide 
containing a disease specific epitope into an immunogen by attaching it to an 
immune or T cell binding peptide (I/TCBL). For CEL-2000, a peptide from human 
collagen type II (254-273) is attached to the I/TCBL peptide from human beta2 
microglobulin (J). Treatment with CEL-2000 limited disease (CIA) progression, as 
demonstrated by reduced Arthritic Index (AI) score, and footpad swelling. 
Efficacy was confirmed by histopathological microscopic examination of tissues 
at the end of the study. CEL-2000 limited disease progression as well or better 
than the etanercept (Enbrel) therapeutic control with significantly better 
histopathological results than the etanercept treated mice. Most interestingly, 
CEL-2000 therapy modulated serum cytokine levels with an increase in IL-12p70 
and IL-10, which are not seen with etanercept therapy, and reduced IL-17 and 
TNF-alpha, also seen with etanercept, among other cytokines studied. CEL-2000 
was safe and well tolerated for the mice that received 5 injections given every 
2weeks in a 90day study supporting its potential usage for long term therapy. 
These studies demonstrate that fewer treatments with CEL-2000 provide therapy at 
least as effective as etanercept by specifically modulating the disease 
producing autoimmune response.
