OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of anti-inflammatory effect and it's 
mechansim of Qufeng Zhitong capsule on the collagen-induced arthritis rat 
through the study of arthritis, joint inflammation and joint erosions.
METHODS: Fifty male SD rat were assigned to 5 groups: normal control group, 
arthritis model group, and Qufeng Zhitong capsule treatment group (including 
low, medium and high doses), each group contains 10 rats. Arthritis were induced 
by immunization with type II collagen (CII) in complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA). 
After administered Qufeng Zhitong capsule 2 weeks, the volume of back foot of 
arthritis rat were detected, and the histology changes of the ankle joints of 
the arthritis rat were studied. The serum levels of IL-10 and TNF-alpha were 
measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: After treated with Qufeng Zhitong capsule, the swelling of the paw of 
the rats were significantly decreased compared with the controls. Histology 
study demonstrated that the Qufeng Zhitong capsule treatment could reduce the 
synovium hyperplasia and inflammatory cell infiltration, the inhibitory effects 
were in accordance with the doses of the drug. The serum levels of 
pro-inflammatory cytokine of TNF-alpha in the arthritis rat were not changed 
significantly, while the serum levels of anti-inflammatory cytokine of IL-10 
were elevated significantly after treated with Qufeng Zhitong capsule.
CONCLUSION: Qufeng Zhitong capsule can inhibit the synovium hyperplasia and 
cartilage erosion by stimulating the serum levels of anti-inflammatory cytokine 
of IL-10 and suggest it can be a candidate of treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
