Diclofenac is an important analgesic and anti-inflammatory drug that is widely 
used for the treatment of postoperative pain, rheumatoid arthritis, and chronic 
pain associated with cancer. Diclofenac is extensively metabolized in the liver, 
and the main metabolites are hydroxylated and/or glucuronidated conjugates. We 
show here that loss of multidrug resistance protein 2 (MRP2/ABCC2) and breast 
cancer resistance protein (BCRP/ABCG2) in mice results in highly increased 
plasma levels of diclofenac acyl glucuronide, after both oral and intravenous 
administration. The absence of Mrp2 and Bcrp1, localized at the canalicular 
membrane of hepatocytes, leads to impaired biliary excretion of acyl 
glucuronides and consequently to elevated liver and plasma levels. Mrp2 also 
mediates the biliary excretion of two hydroxylated diclofenac metabolites, 
4'-hydroxydiclofenac and 5-hydroxydiclofenac. We further show that the 
sinusoidal efflux of diclofenac acyl glucuronide, from liver to blood, is 
largely dependent on multidrug resistance protein 3 (MRP3/ABCC3). Diclofenac 
acyl glucuronides are chemically instable and reactive, and in patients, these 
metabolites are associated with rare but serious idiosyncratic liver toxicity. 
This might explain why Mrp2/Mrp3/Bcrp1(-/-) mice, which have markedly elevated 
levels of diclofenac acyl glucuronides in their liver, display acute, albeit 
very mild, hepatotoxicity. We believe that the handling of diclofenac acyl 
glucuronides by ATP binding cassette transporters may be representative for the 
handling of acyl glucuronide metabolites of many other clinically relevant 
drugs.
