BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Current single drug treatments for rheumatoid arthritis 
have problems of limited efficacy and/or high toxicity. This study investigates 
the benefits of individual and combined treatments with dexamethasone and 
substance P and glutamate receptor antagonists in a rat model of arthritis.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Arthritis was induced in rats by unilateral 
intra-articular injection of Freund's complete adjuvant. Separate groups of rats 
were subjected to the following treatments 15 min before induction of arthritis: 
(i) control with no drug treatment; (ii) single intra-articular injection of a 
NK(1) receptor antagonist RP67580; (iii) single intra-articular injection of a 
NMDA receptor antagonist AP7 plus a non-NMDA receptor antagonist CNQX; (iv) 
daily oral dexamethasone; and (v) combined treatment with dexamethasone and all 
of the above receptor antagonists. Knee joint allodynia, swelling, hyperaemia 
and histological changes were examined over a period of 7 days.
KEY RESULTS: Treatment with dexamethasone suppressed joint swelling, hyperaemia 
and histological changes that include polymorphonuclear cell infiltration, 
synovial tissue proliferation and cartilage erosion in the arthritic rat knees. 
Treatment with RP67580 or AP7 plus CNQX did not attenuate hyperaemia or 
histological changes, but reduced joint allodynia and swelling. 
Co-administration of dexamethasone with these receptor antagonists produced 
greater inhibition on joint allodynia and swelling than their individual 
effects.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The data suggest substance P and glutamate 
contribute to arthritic pain and joint swelling. The efficacy of dexamethasone 
in reducing arthritic pain and joint swelling can be improved by 
co-administration of substance P and glutamate receptor antagonists.
