OBJECTIVE: CD55 (decay-accelerating factor) is best known for its role in the 
negative regulation of the complement system. Indeed, lack of this molecule 
leads to disease aggravation in many autoimmune disease models. However, CD55 is 
abundantly present on fibroblast-like synoviocytes and is also a ligand of the 
adhesion-class heptahelical receptor CD97, which is expressed by infiltrating 
macrophages. Treatment with antibodies to CD97 ameliorates the collagen-induced 
model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in DBA/1 mice, but the net contribution of 
CD55 is unknown. This study was undertaken to investigate the role of CD55 in 
experimental RA.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in wild-type, CD55(-/-), and CD97(-/-) mice using 
collagen-induced and K/BxN serum-transfer models. Incidence of arthritis was 
monitored over time, and disease activity was assessed by clinical and 
immunohistochemical evaluation.
RESULTS: In contrast to observations in many inflammatory disease models, lack 
of CD55 resulted in decreased arthritis in experimental models of RA. Consistent 
with the previously reported effects of anti-CD97 antibody treatment, CD97(-/-) 
mice had reduced arthritis activity compared with wild-type controls.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the lack of CD55 or CD97 in 2 different 
models of arthritis increases resistance to the disease. These findings provide 
insight into a role for CD55 interaction with CD97 in the pathogenesis of RA and 
suggest that therapeutic strategies that disrupt CD55/CD97 may be clinically 
beneficial.
