OBJECTIVE: Since fibroblasts in the synovium of patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) express the serine proteases fibroblast activation protein (FAP) 
and dipeptidylpeptidase 4 (DPP-4)/CD26, we undertook the current study to 
determine the functional role of both enzymes in the invasion of RA synovial 
fibroblasts (RASFs) into articular cartilage.
METHODS: Expression of FAP and DPP-4/CD26 by RASFs was analyzed using 
fluorescence-activated cell sorting and immunocytochemistry. Serine protease 
activity was measured by cleavage of fluorogenic substrates and inhibited upon 
treatment with L-glutamyl L-boroproline. The induction and expression of matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs) and tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) in 
RASFs were detected using real-time polymerase chain reaction. Densitometric 
measurements of MMPs using immunoblotting confirmed our findings on the 
messenger RNA level. Stromal cell-derived factor 1 (SDF-1 [CXCL12]), MMP-1, and 
MMP-3 protein levels were measured using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The 
impact of FAP and DPP-4/CD26 inhibition on the invasiveness of RASFs was 
analyzed in the SCID mouse coimplantation model of RA using 
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Inhibition of serine protease activity of FAP and DPP-4/CD26 in vitro 
led to increased levels of SDF-1 in concert with MMP-1 and MMP-3, which are 
downstream effectors of SDF-1 signaling. Using the SCID mouse coimplantation 
model, inhibition of enzymatic activity in vivo significantly promoted invasion 
of xenotransplanted RASFs into cotransplanted human cartilage. Zones of 
cartilage resorption were infiltrated by FAP-expressing RASFs and marked by a 
significantly higher accumulation of MMP-1 and MMP-3, when compared with 
controls.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate a central role for the serine protease activity 
of FAP and DPP-4/CD26 in protecting articular cartilage against invasion by 
synovial fibroblasts in RA.
