Macrophages play key roles in inflammatory disorders. Therefore, they are 
targets of treatments aiming at their local destruction in inflammation sites. 
However, injection of low molecular mass therapeutics, including 
photosensitizers, in inflamed joints results in their rapid efflux out of the 
joints, and poor therapeutic index. To improve selective uptake and increase 
retention of therapeutics in inflamed tissues, hydrophilic nanogels based on 
chitosan, of which surface was decorated with hyaluronate and which were loaded 
with one of three different anionic photosensitizers were developed. Optimal 
uptake of these functionalized nanogels by murine RAW 264.7 or human THP-1 
macrophages as models was achieved after <4h incubation, whereas only negligible 
uptake by murine fibroblasts used as control cells was observed. The uptake by 
cells and the intracellular localization of the photosensitizers, of the 
fluorescein-tagged chitosan and of the rhodamine-tagged hyaluronate were 
confirmed by fluorescence microscopy. Photodynamic experiments revealed good 
cell photocytotoxicity of the photosensitizers entrapped in the nanogels. In a 
mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis, injection of free photosensitizers resulted 
in their rapid clearance from the joints, while nanogel-encapsulated 
photosensitizers were retained in the inflamed joints over a longer period of 
time. The photodynamic treatment of the inflamed joints resulted in a reduction 
of inflammation comparable to a standard corticoid treatment. Thus, 
hyaluronate-chitosan nanogels encapsulating therapeutic agents are promising 
materials for the targeted delivery to macrophages and long-term retention of 
therapeutics in leaky inflamed articular joints.
