BACKGROUND: DING proteins encompass an intriguing protein family first 
characterized by their conserved N-terminal sequences. Some of these proteins 
seem to have key roles in various human diseases, e.g., rheumatoid arthritis, 
atherosclerosis, HIV suppression. Although this protein family seems to be 
ubiquitous in eukaryotes, their genes are consistently lacking from genomic 
databases. Such a lack has considerably hampered functional studies and has 
fostered therefore the hypothesis that DING proteins isolated from eukaryotes 
were in fact prokaryotic contaminants.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the framework of our study, we have performed a 
comprehensive immunological detection of DING proteins in mice. We demonstrate 
that DING proteins are present in all tissues tested as isoforms of various 
molecular weights (MWs). Their intracellular localization is tissue-dependant, 
being exclusively nuclear in neurons, but cytoplasmic and nuclear in other 
tissues. We also provide evidence that germ-free mouse plasma contains as much 
DING protein as wild-type.
SIGNIFICANCE: Hence, data herein provide a valuable basis for future 
investigations aimed at eukaryotic DING proteins, revealing that these proteins 
seem ubiquitous in mouse tissue. Our results strongly suggest that mouse DING 
proteins are endogenous. Moreover, the determination in this study of the 
precise cellular localization of DING proteins constitute a precious evidence to 
understand their molecular involvements in their related human diseases.
