Daphnetin has been developed as an oral medicine for treatment of coagulation 
disorders and rheumatoid arthritis in China, but its in vitro metabolism remains 
unknown. In the present study, the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) conjugation 
pathways of daphnetin were characterized. Two metabolites, 7-O-monoglucuronide 
daphnetin (M-1) and 8-O-monoglucuronide daphnetin (M-2), were identified by 
liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry and NMR when daphnetin was incubated, 
respectively, with liver microsomes from human (HLM), rat (RLM), and minipig 
(PLM) and human intestinal microsomes (HIM) in the presence of UDP-glucuronic 
acid. Screening assays with 12 human recombinant UGTs demonstrated that the 
formations of M-1 and M-2 were almost exclusively catalyzed by UGT1A9 and 
UGT1A6, whereas M-1 was formed to a minor extent by UGT1A3, 1A4, 1A7, 1A8, and 
1A10 at a high substrate concentration. Kinetics studies, chemical inhibition, 
and correlation analysis were used to demonstrate that human UGT1A9 and UGT1A6 
were major isoforms involved in the daphnetin glucuronidations in HLM and HIM. 
By in vitro-in vivo extrapolation of the kinetic data measured in HLM, the 
hepatic clearance and the corresponding hepatic extraction ratio were estimated 
to be 19.3 ml/min/kg b.wt. and 0.93, respectively, suggesting that human 
clearance of daphnetin via the glucuronidation is extensive. Chemical inhibition 
of daphnetin glucuronidation in HLM, RLM, and PLM showed large species 
differences although the metabolites were formed similarly among the species. In 
conclusion, the UGT conjugation pathways of daphnetin were fully elucidated and 
its C-8 phenol group was more selectively catalyzed by UGTs than by the C-7 
phenol.
