OBJECTIVE: To explore the associations between impairments in hand function 
associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and limitations in computer peripheral 
use.
METHODS: A total of 45 computer users with RA were recruited from the Arthritis 
Network Research Registry. Impairments in hand function were measured using the 
Keitel Hand Function Index, and the Arthritis Hand Function Test, while general 
activity limitations were measured with the Health Assessment Questionnaire. 
Speed of computer peripheral device use was obtained at a laboratory work 
station using the Assessment of Computer Task Performance (ACTP).
RESULTS: Multiple regression models suggested that keyboarding speed was 
significantly associated with touch typing training and age, while mouse speed 
was significantly associated with age. Impairments in hand function were 
significantly associated with only 2 of 7 keyboarding tasks and no mouse tasks. 
General activity limitations were associated with 2 of 7 keyboarding tasks and 2 
of 5 significant mouse tasks. A comparison of this study's sample with a 
normative sample reported for the ACTP suggested that this sample's keyboarding 
speed was similar to a nonimpaired sample, while mouse speed was much slower.
CONCLUSION: Reduced keyboarding speed is most strongly associated with touch 
typing skill. General activity limitations appear to be the strongest 
arthritis-related predictor of decreased computer use speeds. Many computer 
users with RA will not experience reduced productivity in typing speeds, 
although many may be slower than their nonimpaired counterparts for mouse use.
