LFA-1 appears to play a central role in normal immune responses to foreign Ags. 
In autoimmune or inflammatory diseases, there is increased expression of LFA-1 
and/or its counterligand, ICAM-1. Others have demonstrated that the targeted 
disruption of LFA-1:ICAM interactions, either by gene deletion or Ab treatment 
in mice, results in reduced leukocyte trafficking, inflammatory responses, and 
inhibition of inflammatory arthritis in the K/BxN serum transfer model. However, 
there has been little success in finding a small-molecule LFA-1 antagonist that 
can similarly impact rodent models of arthritis. In this paper, we present the 
first reported example of an LFA-1 small-molecule antagonist, BMS-587101, that 
is efficacious in preclinical disease models. In vitro, BMS-587101 inhibited 
LFA-1-mediated adhesion of T cells to endothelial cells, T cell proliferation, 
and Th1 cytokine production. Because BMS-587101 exhibits in vitro potency, 
cross-reactivity, and oral bioavailability in rodents, we evaluated the impact 
of oral administration of this compound in two different models of arthritis: 
Ab-induced arthritis and collagen-induced arthritis. Significant impact of 
BMS-587101 on clinical score in both models was observed, with inhibition 
comparable or better than anti-mouse LFA-1 Ab. In addition, BMS-587101 
significantly reduced cytokine mRNA levels in the joints of Ab-induced arthritis 
animals as compared with those receiving vehicle alone. In paws taken from the 
collagen-induced arthritis study, the bones of vehicle-treated mice had 
extensive inflammation and bone destruction, whereas treatment with BMS-587101 
resulted in marked protection. These findings support the potential use of an 
LFA-1 small-molecule antagonist in rheumatoid arthritis, with the capacity for 
disease modification.
