Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) have been widely used to determine 
quantitatively autoantibodies. However, the processes for the purification and 
immobilization of antigens in conventional ELISA methods include multiple steps, 
which have hampered the application for screening of autoantibodies. Here, we 
have developed a novel ELISA system using the plates pre-coated with glutathione 
casein to capture recombinant proteins fused to N-terminal glutathione 
S-transferase (GST). The GST-fused proteins were synthesized with the wheat germ 
cell-free protein production system. Thus, the present system combined the 
GST-capture ELISA with the cell-free protein production system, which allowed 
immobilization of the recombinant proteins with one-step purification. Using 
this ELISA method, we determined whether rheumatoid factors (RF), which have 
been considered as one of the representative disease-specific autoantibodies for 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), were genetically associated with severity of 
arthritis in a mouse model for RA, MRL/Mp-lpr/lpr (MRL/lpr). GST-fused human 
IgG1-Fc (GST-Fc), synthesized with the robotic protein synthesizer, were used as 
reactants for RF. Serum samples for RF were prepared from 11 lines of a 
recombinant inbred mouse strain, MXH/lpr, which was established from 
intercrosses between MRL/lpr and non-arthritic C3H/HeJ-lpr/lpr (C3H/lpr) 
strains, composed of a different genomic recombination derived from the parental 
strains in each line. A correlation of RF titers with the severity of the 
arthritis in these lines was not significant, indicating genetic dissociation of 
RF from arthritis and that RF is not necessarily required for the development of 
RA. The present method may provide high-throughput screening for determining the 
disease-specific autoantibodies in autoimmune diseases.
