OBJECTIVE: To explore the involvement of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) in 
the development of vascular damage in adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in rats.
METHODS: Angiotensin II (Ang II; 0.25 or 1.0 mg/kg/day) was infused in control 
rats and rats with AIA for 21 days, and the impact of systemic inflammation on 
Ang II-induced hypertension, endothelial dysfunction, and vascular hypertrophy 
was evaluated. Expression of angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT(1)R) and 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the aortas of rats with AIA were examined 
by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blot analyses. Losartan 
(3 mg/kg/day) or irbesartan (5 mg/kg/day), both of which are AT(1)R blockers, 
was administered orally to rats with AIA for 21 days. In situ superoxide 
production in aortas was assessed according to the fluorogenic oxidation of 
dihydroethidium to ethidium. The expression and activity of NAD(P)H oxidases in 
aortas were examined by real-time PCR analysis and lucigenin chemiluminescence 
assay. Endothelial function in rats with AIA treated in vivo or ex vivo with 
AT(1)R blockers was also determined.
RESULTS: The Ang II-induced hypertensive response, endothelial dysfunction, and 
vascular hypertrophy were exacerbated in rats with AIA. Expression of AT(1)R and 
ACE was increased in the aortas of rats with AIA. Both losartan and irbesartan 
decreased the levels of superoxide and the expression and activity NAD(P)H 
oxidases in the aortas of rats with AIA. The endothelial dysfunction in AIA was 
improved by the in vivo or ex vivo treatment with AT(1)R blockers.
CONCLUSION: The locally activated RAS is involved in the increased vascular 
oxidative stress and endothelial dysfunction in AIA. Our findings have important 
implications for clinical approaches to the reduction of cardiovascular risk in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
