OBJECTIVE: To determine whether blood vessel growth at the onset of resolving 
synovitis leads to its subsequent persistence and whether inhibiting this 
angiogenesis at the onset of persistent inflammation leads to its subsequent 
resolution.
METHODS: Inflammation and angiogenesis were induced by injection of 0.03% 
carrageenan and/or 6 pmoles of fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF-2) into rat 
knees. A brief treatment with the angiogenesis inhibitor PPI-2458 (5 mg/kg 
orally on alternate days) was administered 1 day before and up to 3 days after 
synovitis induction. Controls comprised naive and vehicle-treated rats. Synovial 
angiogenesis was measured using the endothelial cell proliferation index, and 
inflammation was determined by measuring joint swelling and macrophage 
percentage area. Data are presented as the geometric mean (95% confidence 
interval).
RESULTS: Intraarticular injection of 0.03% carrageenan into rat knees produced 
acute synovitis, which was not associated with synovial angiogenesis and which 
resolved within 29 days. Injection of FGF-2 (6 pmoles) induced synovial 
angiogenesis without significant synovitis. Stimulation of angiogenesis with 
FGF-2 at the time of carrageenan injection was followed by synovitis that 
persisted for 29 days. Persistence of carrageenan/FGF-2-induced synovitis was 
prevented by systemic administration of 3 doses of the angiogenesis inhibitor 
PPI-2458 during the acute phase.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that conversion of acute inflammation to 
chronic inflammation may be due to the stimulation of angiogenesis, and brief 
antiangiogenic treatment during the acute phase of synovitis may prevent its 
subsequent progression. Clinical studies will be needed to determine whether 
brief antiangiogenic treatment may reduce the burden of inflammatory joint 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis by facilitating the resolution of early 
synovitis.
