Osteoclasts, bone-resorbing multinucleated cells, are differentiated from 
hemopoietic progenitors of the monocyte/macrophage lineage. Bone resorption by 
osteoclasts is considered a potential therapeutic target to the treatment of 
erosive bone diseases, including osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
periodontitis. In the present study, we found that alisol-B, a phyto-steroid 
from Alisma orientale Juzepczuk, exhibited inhibitory effects on 
osteoclastogenesis both in vitro and in vivo. Although RT-PCR analysis showed 
that alisol-B did not affect the 1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3)-induced expressions of 
RANKL, OPG and M-CSF mRNAs in osteoblasts, addition of alisol-B to co-cultures 
of mouse bone marrow cells and primary osteoblasts with 10(-8)M 
1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) caused significant inhibition of osteoclastogenesis. We 
further examined the direct effects of alisol-B on osteoclast precursors. 
Alisol-B strongly inhibited RANKL-induced osteoclast formation when added during 
the early stage of cultures, suggesting that alisol-B acts on osteoclast 
precursors to inhibit RANKL/RANK signaling. Among the RANK signaling pathways, 
alisol-B inhibited the phosphorylation of JNK, which are upregulated in response 
to RANKL in bone marrow macrophages, alisol-B also inhibited RANKL-induced 
expression of NFATc1 and c-Fos, which are key transcription factors for 
osteoclastogenesis. In addition, alisol-B suppressed the pit-forming activity 
and disrupted the actin ring formation of mature osteoclasts. In a hypercalcemic 
mouse model induced by 2-methylene-19-nor-(20S)-1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3) (2MD), an 
analog of 1alpha,25(OH)(2)D(3), administration of alisol-B significantly 
suppressed 2MD-induced hypercalcemia as resulting from the inhibition of 
osteoclastogenesis. Taken together, these findings suggest that alisol-B may be 
a potential novel therapeutic molecule for bone disorders by targeting the 
differentiation of osteoclasts as well as their functions.
