Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) is a major inflammatory cytokine that 
plays an important role in the development of various inflammatory diseases. 
TNF-alpha has been considered as a potential therapeutic target for the 
treatment of chronic inflammatory diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis and 
inflammatory bowel disease. In this study, we report that 
cyclopropyl-{4-[4-(4-fluorophenyl)-2-piperidin-4-yl-thiazol-5-yl]pyrimidin-2-yl}amine 
(DBM1285) is a novel inhibitor of TNF-alpha production. DBM1285 
concentration-dependently inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced TNF-alpha 
secretion in various cells of macrophage/monocyte lineage, including mouse bone 
marrow macrophages, THP-1 cells, and RAW 264.7 cells. However, LPS-induced mRNA 
expression of TNF-alpha was not affected by DBM1285 in these cells. Further 
studies demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of DBM1285 on TNF-alpha 
production might be mediated by post-transcriptional regulation through the 
modulation of the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/MAPK-activated 
protein kinase 2 (MK2) signaling pathway. We also confirmed that DBM1285 
directly inhibits p38 MAPK enzymatic activity. In vivo administration of DBM1285 
inhibited LPS-induced increase in the plasma level of TNF-alpha in mice. 
Whole-blood in vivo target inhibition assay also revealed that DBM1285 
attenuates p38 MAPK activity after oral administration in mice. Moreover, 
DBM1285 suppressed zymosan-induced inflammation and adjuvant-induced arthritis 
in murine models. Collectively, these results suggest that DBM1285 inhibits 
TNF-alpha production, at least in part, by blocking the p38 MAPK/MK2 pathway. 
Furthermore, in vivo results suggest that DBM1285 might be a possible 
therapeutic candidate for the treatment of TNF-alpha-related chronic 
inflammatory diseases.
