BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disorder 
involving subsets of activated T cells, in particular T helper (Th) 1 and Th17 
cells, which infiltrate and damage tissues and induce inflammation. 
Prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) enhances the Th17 response, exacerbates 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and promotes inflammatory pain. The current 
study investigated whether selective antagonism of the PGE(2) EP(4) receptor 
would suppress Th1/Th17 cell development and inflammatory arthritis in animal 
models of RA.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Effects of PGE(2) and a novel EP(4) receptor antagonist 
ER-819762 on Th1 differentiation, interleukin-23 (IL-23) production by dendritic 
cells (DCs), and Th17 development were assessed in vitro. The effect of 
ER-819762 was evaluated in CIA and glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI)-induced 
arthritis models. In addition, the effects of ER-819762 on pain were evaluated 
in a model of chronic inflammatory pain induced by complete Freund's adjuvant 
(CFA) in the rat.
KEY RESULTS: Stimulation of the EP(4) receptor enhanced Th1 differentiation via 
phosphatidylinositol 3 kinase signalling, selectively promoted Th17 cell 
expansion, and induced IL-23 secretion by activated DCs, effects suppressed by 
ER-819762 or anti-PGE(2) antibody. Oral administration of ER-19762 suppressed 
Th1 and Th17 cytokine production, suppressed disease in collagen- and 
GPI-induced arthritis in mice, and suppressed CFA-induced inflammatory pain in 
rats.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: PGE(2) stimulates EP(4) receptors to promote Th1 
differentiation and Th17 expansion and is critically involved in development of 
arthritis in two animal models. Selective suppression of EP(4) receptor 
signalling may have therapeutic value in RA both by modifying inflammatory 
arthritis and by relieving pain.
