Serum amyloid A (A-SAA), an acute-phase protein with cytokine-like properties, 
is expressed at sites of inflammation. This study investigated the effects of 
A-SAA on chemokine-regulated migration and angiogenesis using rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) cells and whole-tissue explants in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo. 
A-SAA levels were measured by real-time PCR and ELISA. IL-8 and MCP-1 expression 
was examined in RA synovial fibroblasts, human microvascular endothelial cells, 
and RA synovial explants by ELISA. Neutrophil transendothelial cell migration, 
cell adhesion, invasion, and migration were examined using transwell 
leukocyte/monocyte migration assays, invasion assays, and adhesion assays with 
or without anti-MCP-1/anti-IL-8. NF-kappaB was examined using a specific 
inhibitor and Western blotting. An RA synovial/SCID mouse chimera model was used 
to examine the effects of A-SAA on cell migration, proliferation, and 
angiogenesis in vivo. High expression of A-SAA was demonstrated in RA patients 
(p < 0.05). A-SAA induced chemokine expression in a time- and dose-dependent 
manner (p < 0.05). Blockade with anti-scavenger receptor class B member 1 and 
lipoxin A4 (A-SAA receptors) significantly reduced chemokine expression in RA 
synovial tissue explants (p < 0.05). A-SAA induced cell invasion, 
neutrophil-transendothelial cell migration, monocyte migration, and adhesion 
(all p < 0.05), effects that were blocked by anti-IL-8 or anti-MCP-1. 
A-SAA-induced chemokine expression was mediated through NF-kappaB in RA explants 
(p < 0.05). Finally, in the RA synovial/SCID mouse chimera model, we 
demonstrated for the first time in vivo that A-SAA directly induces monocyte 
migration from the murine circulation into RA synovial grafts, synovial cell 
proliferation, and angiogenesis (p < 0.05). A-SAA promotes cell migrational 
mechanisms and angiogenesis critical to RA pathogenesis.
