Anti-CD20 B cell depletion therapy (BCDT) is very effective for some patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA); however the pathogenic role of B lymphocytes in 
RA and the primary targets of BCDT are unknown. The human TNF transgenic 
(hTNF-Tg) mouse model of RA displays a chronic, progressive disease that spreads 
from distal to proximal joints and is generally considered to be adaptive immune 
system independent. We have previously reported that knee arthritis in hTNF-Tg 
mice is accompanied by structural and functional changes of the adjoining 
popliteal lymph node (PLN), detectable by contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance 
imaging. To better understand these changes, in this paper we show that onset of 
knee synovitis and focal erosions are paralleled by PLN contraction and 
accumulation of large numbers of B cells in the lymphatic sinus spaces within 
the node. Flow cytometry from TNF-Tg mice 2, 4-5, and 8-12 mo old demonstrated 
that B cell accumulation in the PLN follows ankle arthritis, but commences 
before knee disease, and involves early expansion of CD21(hi), CD23(+), IgM(hi), 
CD1d(+), activation marker-negative, polyclonal B cells that are found to be 
specifically restricted to lymph nodes draining inflamed, arthritic joints. The 
same B cell population also accumulates in PLNs of K/BxN mice with 
autoantigen-dependent arthritis. Strikingly, we show that BCDT ameliorates 
hTNF-Tg disease and clears follicular and CD21(hi), CD23(+) B cells from the 
PLNs. On the basis of these findings, we propose a model whereby B cells 
contribute to arthritis in mice, and possibly RA, by directly affecting the 
structure, composition, and function of joint-draining lymph nodes.
