OBJECTIVE: Glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper (GILZ) is a 
glucocorticoid-induced protein, the reported molecular interactions of which 
suggest that it functions to inhibit inflammation. However, the role of 
endogenous GILZ in the regulation of inflammation in vivo has not been 
established. This study was undertaken to examine the expression and function of 
GILZ in vivo in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), a murine model of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), and in RA synoviocytes.
METHODS: GILZ expression was detected in mouse and human synovium by 
immunohistochemistry and in cultured cells by real-time polymerase chain 
reaction and permeabilization flow cytometry. GILZ function was assessed in vivo 
by small interfering RNA (siRNA) silencing using cationic liposome-encapsulated 
GILZ or control nontargeting siRNA and was assessed in vitro using transient 
overexpression.
RESULTS: GILZ was readily detectable in the synovium of mice with CIA and was 
up-regulated by therapeutic doses of glucocorticoids. Depleting GILZ expression 
in vivo increased the clinical and histologic severity of CIA and increased 
synovial expression of tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-1 (IL-1), without 
affecting the levels of circulating cytokines or anticollagen antibodies. GILZ 
was highly expressed in the synovium of patients with active RA and in cultured 
RA synovial fibroblasts, and GILZ overexpression in synovial fibroblasts 
inhibited IL-6 and IL-8 release.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that GILZ functions as an endogenous inhibitor 
of chronic inflammation via effects on cytokine expression and suggest that 
local modulation of GILZ expression could be a beneficial therapeutic strategy.
