The role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of various conditions including 
epilepsy, inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid arthritis is evolving. The 
aim of this study was to find out the correlation between various inflammatory 
models with seizures and antioxidant parameters. Fifty-four male rats were 
divided into three groups of colitis, adjuvant arthritis and cotton wool 
granuloma (CWG). Each group had three subgroups of control, model and treatment. 
Thalidomide was used as treatment in colitis and arthritis group, whereas 
etoricoxib was used in CWG group. In colitis and arthritis groups, thalidomide 
was administered for 3 and 17 days, respectively, whereas etoricoxib was 
administered for 7 days in CWG group. At the end of treatment protocols, a 
subconvulsive dose of pentylenetetrazole (PTZ) (40 mg/kg i.p.) was injected 
intraperitoneally to note seizure onset and score. After confirming the presence 
of inflammation by morphological and histological studies, plasma and brain 
biochemical parameters of oxidative stress were estimated. The models of 
colitis, arthritis and CWG were effectively produced as evidenced by 
morphological scores (P < 0.001). Thalidomide reduced the morphological score (P 
< 0.002) and seizure grade (P < 0.001), whereas increased seizure onset (P < 
0.001) in the arthritis group. There was an increase in malondialdehyde levels 
in the brain of thalidomide-treated groups (P < 0.002) and a significant 
decrease in superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) levels. 
There was neither improvement in seizure nor any significant changes in lipid 
peroxidation and antioxidant enzyme levels in etoricoxib-treated group. 
Thalidomide was effective in reducing the extent of arthritis as well as 
reducing the seizure scoring and increasing seizure onset in the adjuvant 
arthritis group. As it increased lipid peroxidation and reduced SOD and GPx, 
further evaluation is necessary with respect to oxidative stress.
