OBJECTIVE: The interaction between CXCL12 and its receptor, CXCR4, in the 
synovium of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is important for local 
inflammatory cell recruitment, angiogenesis, and cytokine production. CXCR7 was 
recently identified as an alternative receptor for CXCL12. We undertook this 
study to analyze the expression of CXCR7 in RA synovium and the pathogenic role 
of the CXCL12/CXCR7 pathway in RA.
METHODS: CXCR7 expression in RA synovial tissue was analyzed using 
immunohistochemistry, while expression of CXCR4 and CXCR7 on human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) was examined using quantitative reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and CXCR7 expression was also analyzed 
by flow cytometry. Tube formation and rat aortic ring angiogenesis assays were 
used to assess the effects of CCX733 (a CXCR7 antagonist) and AMD3100 (a CXCR4 
antagonist) on CXCL12-induced angiogenesis. The effect of anti-CXCR4 monoclonal 
antibody (mAb) was also analyzed using a tube formation assay. The effects of 
CCX733 in a murine model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) were also 
evaluated.
RESULTS: CXCR7 was expressed on endothelial cells in RA synovium and also on 
unstimulated HUVECs. The expression of CXCR7 on HUVECs was markedly up-regulated 
by interleukin-1β (IL-1β) stimulation, and this overexpression was further 
enhanced by CXCL12 treatment. Incubation with CXCL12 also promoted angiogenic 
activity, with addition of IL-1β again augmenting the effect. CXCL12-induced 
angiogenesis was inhibited by both CXCR4 and CXCR7 antagonists and by anti-CXCR4 
mAb. Furthermore, treatment with CCX733 significantly reduced the clinical 
arthritis scores and the numbers of vessels in the inflamed synovial tissue in 
mice with CIA.
CONCLUSION: CXCR7 and CXCR4 are both important for angiogenesis in RA synovium, 
making CXCR7 another potential target molecule for novel RA 
angiogenesis-blocking therapies.
