OBJECTIVES: Both collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and pristane-induced arthritis 
(PIA) are commonly used rat models of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim of this 
study was systematically to compare the differences between CIA and PIA in Dark 
Agouti (DA) rats.
METHODS: The CIA was induced by immunising DA rats intradermally with collagen 
type (C) and PIA was induced by injecting subcutaneously with pristane. The 
arthritis was evaluated macroscopically and microscopically. Nitric oxide (NO) 
level of plasma was determined by Griess reaction method. Plasma autoimmune 
antibodies, including C specific IgG antibody (anti-C IgG), cyclic citrullinated 
peptide specific IgG antibody (anti-CCP IgG), IgM and IgG rheumatoid factors 
(IgM RF and IgG RF), were detected by the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: The onset of PIA rats was earlier than that of CIA rats. The involved 
sites of PIA rats were mostly wrist/ankle and 
metacarpophalangeal/metatarsophalangeal (MCP/MTP) joints while those of CIA rats 
were primarily distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints. NO level of plasma was 
increased in PIA rats, as anti-C IgG, anti-CCP IgG, IgM RF and IgG RF levels of 
plasma were increased in CIA rats. The kidney hyaline casts were more frequent 
in CIA rats than in control rats, with 9/12 in PIA group, 8/8 in CIA, and 4/8 in 
control, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: PIA mainly affected wrist/ankle joints and MCP/MTP joints, had more 
severe inflammation and hardly involved other organs; while CIA mostly 
influenced DIP joints, had more autoimmune antibodies in plasma, and always 
showed hyaline casts in kidney. These findings will be useful to select the 
animal model of RA.
