BACKGROUND: The Janus kinase (JAK) family of tyrosine kinases includes JAK1, 
JAK2, JAK3 and TYK2, and is required for signaling through Type I and Type II 
cytokine receptors. CP-690,550 is a potent and selective JAK inhibitor currently 
in clinical trials for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other autoimmune disease 
indications. In RA trials, dose-dependent decreases in neutrophil counts (PBNC) 
were observed with CP-690,550 treatment. These studies were undertaken to better 
understand the relationship between JAK selectivity and PBNC decreases observed 
with CP-690,550 treatment.
METHODS: Potency and selectivity of CP-690,550 for mouse, rat and human JAKs was 
evaluated in a panel of in vitro assays. The effect of CP-690,550 on 
granulopoiesis from progenitor cells was also assessed in vitro using colony 
forming assays. In vivo the potency of orally administered CP-690,550 on 
arthritis (paw edema), plasma cytokines, PBNC and bone marrow differentials were 
evaluated in the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) model.
RESULTS: CP-690,550 potently inhibited signaling through JAK1 and JAK3 with 
5-100 fold selectivity over JAK2 in cellular assays, despite inhibiting all four 
JAK isoforms with nM potency in in vitro enzyme assays. Dose-dependent 
inhibition of paw edema was observed in vivo with CP-690,550 treatment. Plasma 
cytokines (IL-6 and IL-17), PBNC, and bone marrow myeloid progenitor cells were 
elevated in the context of AIA disease. At efficacious exposures, CP-690,550 
returned all of these parameters to pre-disease levels. The plasma concentration 
of CP-690,550 at efficacious doses was above the in vitro whole blood IC50 of 
JAK1 and JAK3 inhibition, but not that of JAK2.
CONCLUSION: Results from this investigation suggest that CP-690,550 is a potent 
inhibitor of JAK1 and JAK3 with potentially reduced cellular potency for JAK2. 
In rat AIA, as in the case of human RA, PBNC were decreased at efficacious 
exposures of CP-690,550. Inflammatory end points were similarly reduced, as 
judged by attenuation of paw edema and cytokines IL-6 and IL-17. Plasma 
concentration at these exposures was consistent with inhibition of JAK1 and JAK3 
but not JAK2. Decreases in PBNC following CP-690,550 treatment may thus be 
related to attenuation of inflammation and are likely not due to suppression of 
granulopoiesis through JAK2 inhibition.
