The advent of therapies that specifically target the B-lymphocyte lineage in 
human disease has rejuvenated interest in the mechanistic biology by which B 
cells mediate autoimmunity. B cells have a multitude of effector functions 
including production of self-reactive antibodies, ability to present antigen to 
T lymphocytes in the context of costimulation, involvement in generation and 
maintenance of neo-organogenesis at sites of disease, and opposing function 
through production of both immunostimulatory and immunomodulatory cytokines. In 
this review, we first discuss the role of B cells in driving autoimmune diseases 
such as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
and Sj√∂gren's syndrome, and discuss how studies in these diseases have revealed 
differentially important roles for the multiple B-cell effector functions. These 
data reveal the complex and interrelated roles of B cells working in concert 
with other components of the innate and adaptive immune system to drive 
pathogenesis. We then focus on data from mouse and human in which B cells in the 
setting of disease have been targeted with drugs directed against CD20, CD22, 
and the BAFF (B-cell activating factor belonging to the tumor necrosis factor 
family)/APRIL (a proliferation inducing ligand) pathways. Pre-clinical studies 
in animal models in addition to and clinical trials targeting B cells have added 
further to the understanding of the differential roles B cells play in disease 
both through demonstration of clinical efficacy in the context of B-cell 
depletion or modulation, and also by failure of B-cell targeting in some 
diseases and disease patient subgroups. Moving forward, it will be imperative to 
apply these lessons to new interventional trials to ensure better targeting of 
the B-cell lineage and concomitantly better selection of patients most likely to 
benefit from these therapies.
