Pulmonary fibrosis is characterized by progressive worsening of pulmonary 
function leading to a high incidence of death. Currently, however, there has 
been little progress in therapeutic strategies for pulmonary fibrosis. There 
have been several reports on cytokines being associated with lung fibrosis, 
including interleukin (IL)-6 and transforming growth factor (TGF)-β1. We 
reported recently that two substances (ATRA and thalidomide) have preventive 
effects on pulmonary fibrosis by inhibiting IL-6-dependent proliferation and 
TGF-β1-dependent transdifferentiation of lung fibroblasts. Rheumatoid arthritis 
is a chronic autoimmune disorder, and its pathogenesis is also characterized by 
an association with several cytokines. It has been reported that calpain, a 
calcium-dependent intracellular cysteine protease, plays an important role in 
the progression of rheumatoid arthritis. In this study, we examined the 
preventive effect of Calpeptin, a calpain inhibitor, on bleomycin-induced 
pulmonary fibrosis. We performed histological examinations and quantitative 
measurements of IL-6, TGF-β1, collagen type Iα1 and angiopoietin-1 in 
bleomycin-treated mouse lung tissues with or without the administration of 
Calpeptin. Calpeptin histologically ameliorated bleomycin-induced pulmonary 
fibrosis in mice. Calpeptin decreased the expression of IL-6, TGF-β1, 
angiopoietin-1 and collagen type Iα1 mRNA in mouse lung tissues. In vitro 
studies disclosed that Calpeptin reduced (i) production of IL-6, TGF-β1, 
angiopoietin-1 and collagen synthesis from lung fibroblasts; and (ii) both 
IL-6-dependent proliferation and angiopoietin-1-dependent migration of the 
cells, which could be the mechanism underlying the preventive effect of 
Calpeptin on pulmonary fibrosis. These data suggest the clinical use of 
Calpeptin for the prevention of pulmonary fibrosis.

© 2010 Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2010 British Society for 
Immunology.
