Galectin-1 (Gal-1), a β-galactoside-binding lectin, plays a profound role in 
modulating adaptive immune responses by altering the phenotype and fate of T 
cells. Experimental data showing recombinant Gal-1 (rGal-1) efficacy on T cell 
viability and cytokine production, nevertheless, is controversial due to the 
necessity of using stabilizing chemicals to help retain Gal-1 structure and 
function. To address this drawback, we developed a mouse Gal-1 human Ig chimera 
(Gal-1hFc) that did not need chemical stabilization for Gal-1 ligand 
recognition, apoptosis induction, and cytokine modulation in a variety of 
leukocyte models. At high concentrations, Gal-1hFc induced apoptosis in Gal-1 
ligand(+) Th1 and Th17 cells, leukemic cells, and granulocytes from synovial 
fluids of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Importantly, at low, more 
physiologic concentrations, Gal-1hFc retained its homodimeric form without 
losing functionality. Not only did Gal-1hFc-binding trigger IL-10 and Th2 
cytokine expression in activated T cells, but members of the CD28 family and 
several other immunomodulatory molecules were upregulated. In a mouse model of 
contact hypersensitivity, we found that a non-Fc receptor-binding isoform of 
Gal-1hFc, Gal-1hFc2, alleviated T cell-dependent inflammation by increasing 
IL-4(+), IL-10(+), TGF-β(+), and CD25(high)/FoxP3(+) T cells, and by decreasing 
IFN-γ(+) and IL-17(+) T cells. Moreover, in human skin-resident T cell cultures, 
Gal-1hFc diminished IL-17(+) T cells and increased IL-4(+) and IL-10(+) T cells. 
Gal-1hFc will not only be a useful new tool for investigating the role of Gal-1 
ligands in leukocyte death and cytokine stimulation, but for studying how 
Gal-1-Gal-1 ligand binding shapes the intensity of immune responses.
