BACKGROUND: Leukotrienes (LTs) belong to the large family of lipid mediators 
implicated in various inflammatory conditions such as asthma and rheumatoid 
arthritis. Four distinct types (BLT1, BLT2, CysLT1 and CysLT2) of 
G-protein-coupled receptors for LTs have been identified. Several studies have 
reported that LTs are involved in inflammatory pain, but the mechanism and the 
expression of LT receptors in the nociceptive pathway are unknown.
RESULTS: We investigated the precise expression of these four types of LT 
receptors in the adult rat dorsal root ganglion (DRG) using reverse 
transcription-polymerase reaction (RT-PCR) and radioisotope-labeled in situ 
hybridization histochemistry (ISHH). We detected mRNAs for BLT1 and CysLT2 in 
the DRG, but not for BLT2 and CysLT1. CysLT2 mRNA was preferentially expressed 
by small sized DRG neurons (about 36% of total neurons), whereas BLT1 mRNA was 
expressed by non-neuronal cells. Double labeling analysis of CysLT2 with NF-200, 
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), isolectin B4 (IB4), transient receptor 
potential vanilloid subfamily 1 (TRPV1) and P2X3 receptor revealed that many 
CysLT2-labeled neurons were localized with unmyelinated and non-peptidergic 
neurons, and interestingly, CysLT2 mRNA heavily co-localized with TRPV1 and 
P2X3-positive neurons. Intraplantar injection of LTC4, a CysLT2 receptor 
agonist, itself did not induce the thermal hyperalgesia, spontaneous pain 
behaviors or swelling of hind paw. However, pretreatment of LTC4 remarkably 
enhanced the painful behaviors produced by alpha, beta-methylene adenosine 
5'-triphosphate (αβ-me-ATP), a P2X3 receptor agonist.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggests that CysLT2 expressed in DRG neurons may play a 
role as a modulator of P2X3, and contribute to a potentiation of the neuronal 
activity following peripheral inflammation.
