ABX-IL8 is a fully human IgG₂ monoclonal antibody generated using transgenic 
mouse technology (Xenomouse®) that binds to human Interleukin-8 with high 
affinity and specificity. The objective of this study was to evaluate the 
pharmacokinetic (PK) properties of ABX-IL8 in patients with active inflammatory 
diseases. Patients with psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis received single or 
multiple short intravenous infusions of ABX-IL8 or placebo. Serum concentrations 
of ABX-IL8, baseline serum IgG and IgG₂ concentrations and Anti-Drug Antibody 
(ADA) response to ABX-IL8 were determined using relevant immunoassays. 
Pharmacokinetic analyses of the serum ABX-IL8 concentration-time data were 
performed. Following single-dose administration of ABX-IL8, dose proportional 
increases in drug exposure were observed. Consistent with the disposition 
properties of the endogenous IgG antibodies, ABX-IL8 appeared to be primarily 
distributed into the plasma compartment and the extra-vascular fluid and the 
steady-sate volume of distribution (61 ± 14 to 71 ± 14 mL/kg) was comparable to 
that for the endogenous antibodies. Following the multiple-dose administration, 
PK properties of the antibody were linear with dose and time. Steady-state 
clearance (2.6 ± 1.1 to 2.7 ± 1.4 mL/day/kg) was similar to that observed 
following the single dose administration and no ADA response was detected 
throughout the study. PK variability and serum exposure to ABX-IL8 following 
administration of the fixed doses were comparable to those observed following 
administration of the weight-adjusted doses; the impact of body weight on 
clearance was minimal and this correlation did not translate into requirements 
for body weight-adjusted dosing. Additionally, age and disease type (psoriasis 
or RA) had no impact on ABX-IL8 pharmacokinetics.
