Thymoquinone (TQ) is the major active compound derived from the medicinal 
Nigella sativa. A few studies have shown that TQ exhibits anti-inflammatory 
activities in experimental models of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) through 
mechanisms that are not fully understood. The aim of this work was to evaluate 
the in vitro and in vivo effects of TQ and to investigate its influence on the 
major signalling pathways involved in pathophysiological RA changes. We used 
isolated human RA fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) and a rat adjuvant-induced 
arthritis model of RA. In isolated RA FLS, TQ (0-10 µM) was not cytotoxic and 
inhibited slightly lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced FLS proliferation and 
strongly H(2)O(2)-induced 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE) generation. By studying 
different inflammatory and catabolic factors, we determined that TQ 
significantly abolished LPS-induced interleukin-1beta (IL-1β), tumour necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNFα), metalloproteinase-13, cyclooxygenase-2, and prostaglandin 
E(2). Furthermore, LPS-induced the phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase, extracellular-regulated kinases ½, and nuclear factor-kappaB-p65 
were also blocked by TQ in time-dependent manner. In our experimental RA model, 
the oral administration of TQ 5 mg/kg/day significantly reduced the serum levels 
of HNE, IL-1β and TNFα as well as bone turnover markers, such as alkaline 
phosphatase and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase. The protective effects of 
TQ against RA were also evident from the decrease in arthritis scoring and bone 
resorption. In conclusion, the fact that TQ abolishes a number of factors known 
to be involved in RA pathogenesis renders it a clinically valuable agent in the 
prevention of articular diseases, including RA.
