Semaphorin-3A (Sema3A), a member of a large family of conserved proteins 
originally implicated in axon guidance, is expressed by activated T cells and 
downmodulates T cell activation in vitro. This study examined the effect and 
mechanism of action of Sema3A overexpression in a mouse model of 
collagen-induced arthritis. Prophylactic i.p. administration of plasmid DNA 
encoding Sema3A markedly reduced the incidence, disease severity, and articular 
inflammation compared with control plasmid without insert. Treatment of Sema3A 
reduced anticollagen IgG levels and suppressed collagen-specific proinflammatory 
cytokine (IFN-Î³ and IL-17) release, but increased IL-10 concentration in the 
serum. In line with results in arthritic mice, Sema3A expression is defective in 
CD4(+) T cells derived from patients with rheumatoid arthritis. In contrast, 
increased expression of the Sema3A receptor neuropilin-1 (NP-1) is detected in 
the same cells. The CD4(+)NP-1(+) T cells are a T cell subset involved in the 
control of the immune responses. They express greater amounts of IL-10 and show 
suppressive activities on autologous CD4(+) T cells. Sema3A acted directly on 
CD4(+)NP-1(+) T cells, because it could increase IL-10 production and influence 
the regulatory function on CD4(+) T cell growth. Therefore, I propose that 
Sema3A increases the CD4(+)NP-1(+) T cell ability to suppress alloresponses, 
that its transient expression is altered in rheumatoid inflammation, and that 
reintroduction of Sema3A is sufficient to attenuate collagen-induced arthritis, 
supporting its therapeutic potential in the treatment of autoimmune disorders.
