Methotrexate (MTX) has been used as the first-line disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drug (DMARD) in patients with early progressive rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Several severe side effects such as myelosuppression, hepato-, 
nephro-, and pulmonary toxicities have been reported. However, the pathogenic 
mechanism of MTX-induced pulmonary fibrosis is still unknown. Here, we evaluated 
the morphological and biological changes of the pulmonary fibrosis in mice 
treated with MTX. Three, four and five weeks after consecutive administration of 
MTX (3 mg/kg/day), hydroxyproline content in the lung tissues increased 
significantly to about 2 times higher that of the control level. This result 
closely reflected to the results of hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Azan stains. 
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that MTX treatment resulted in a decrease 
of alveolar epithelial cells and an increase of fibroblast cells in the mouse 
lung tissues. When we examined the effects of MTX on primary mouse alveolar 
epithelial cell (MAEC) and mouse lung fibroblast (MLF) survival in vitro, the 
efficiency of MTX-induced cytotoxicity and apoptosis in MAEC was more sensitive 
than MLF cells. Thus, our results indicate that the administration of MTX by an 
oral route could induce a fibrotic response with cell dysfunction of the 
alveolar epithelium by which MTX-induced apoptosis. Our results thus suggest 
that MTX could induce alveolar epithelial cell injury and resulted in the loss 
of integrity of the alveolar-capillary barrier basement membranes followed by 
the recruitment and proliferation of myofibroblasts with the deposition of 
collagens.
