OBJECTIVE: In vivo optical imaging can delineate at the macroscopic level 
processes that are occurring at the cellular and molecular levels. E-selectin, a 
leukocyte adhesion molecule expressed on endothelium, is induced by tumor 
necrosis factor α (TNFα) and other cytokines involved in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in mice is widely 
used to study the disease mechanisms and identify new treatments for RA. The 
purpose of this study was to demonstrate E-selectin-targeted fluorescence 
imaging in vivo in a mouse model of paw edema generated by local injection of 
TNFα as well as in mice with CIA.
METHODS: Animals with either CIA or TNFα-induced paw edema were injected with 
anti-E-selectin or control antibodies labeled with a DyLight 750-nm 
near-infrared (NIR) probe. In vivo imaging studies were undertaken using an NIR 
optical imaging system, and images were coregistered with plain radiographic 
images.
RESULTS: The mean fluorescence intensity measured over the time-course of 
TNFα-induced edema demonstrated a 1.97-fold increase (P<0.001) in signal in 
inflamed paws at 8 hours following injection of anti-E-selectin antibody, as 
compared to that in the isotype control. In the CIA model, a 2.34-fold increase 
in E-selectin-targeted signal was demonstrated (P<0.01). Furthermore, 
significant E-selectin-targeted signal was observed in the paws of animals 
immunized with collagen that did not display overt signs of arthritis.
CONCLUSION: E-selectin-targeted fluorescence in vivo imaging is a quantifiable 
method of detecting endothelial activation in arthritis and can potentially be 
applied to the quantification of disease and the investigation of the effects of 
new therapies. Importantly, this approach may also be useful for the detection 
of subclinical disease in RA.
