OBJECTIVE: The proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-17A (IL-17A) is produced 
primarily by the CD4+ T cell subset called Th17 cells, which is involved in host 
defense, inflammation, and autoimmune disorders. This study was undertaken to 
investigate the effect of a high-affinity RNA molecule, called an aptamer, 
against human IL-17A on IL-17A-induced signal transduction in vitro and its 
anti-autoimmune efficacy in vivo in 2 mouse models of inflammation.
METHODS: By screening a large library of nuclease-resistant RNA 
oligonucleotides, we selected an RNA aptamer, Apt21-2, that binds human and 
mouse IL-17 and blocks the interaction between IL-17A and its receptor. The 
inhibition of IL-17A-mediated phosphorylation and marker protein production was 
analyzed in human and mouse cells. Mice with glucose-6-phosphate isomerase 
(GPI)-induced rheumatoid arthritis and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
(MOG)-induced experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis were used to assess 
efficacy.
RESULTS: Apt21-2 prevented efficient phosphorylation of the IL-17A signaling 
factors IÎºB and JNK and inhibited the production of IL-6 in human and mouse 
cells. A PEGylated form of Apt21-2 (PEG21-2idT) exhibited a 50% inhibition 
concentration (IC(50) ) in the range of 1-2 nM and 70-80 nM in human and mouse 
cells, respectively. When administered immediately after immunization with GPI 
or MOG, PEG21-2idT inhibited in a dose-dependent manner the development of 
arthritic or neurologic symptoms. Significantly, PEG21-2idT slowed the 
progression of arthritis when administered after the onset of GPI-induced 
arthritis.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the chemically processed anti-IL-17A 
aptamer PEG21-2idT inhibits the actions of IL-17A as well as the development of 
autoimmunity in 2 mouse models of inflammation. These results offer for the 
first time an aptamer-based therapeutic approach to the treatment of Th17 
cell-mediated autoimmune disorders.
