OBJECTIVE: Most therapeutic treatments for autoimmune arthritis rely on 
immunosuppressive drugs, which have side effects. Although a previous study by 
our group showed that specific ERK activation suppressed immune responses, its 
application in a therapeutic setting has never been tested. The aim of the 
present study was to define the ERK-dependent immunosuppressive mechanisms and 
to apply selective ERK activation for the treatment of experimental inflammatory 
arthritis.
METHODS: A constitutively active ERK activator was coexpressed with a model 
antigen using lentivectors. Immunosuppressive mechanisms were characterized at 
the level of dendritic cell (DC) function, differentiation of antigen-specific 
Treg cells, and inhibition of inflammatory T cells. Administration of the ERK 
activator with antigen as a strategy to suppress inflammatory arthritis was 
tested in an experimental mouse model.
RESULTS: Selective ERK activation induced mouse and human DCs to secrete 
bioactive transforming growth factor Î², a process required for suppression of T 
cell responses and differentiation of antigen-specific Treg cells. Treg cells 
strongly proliferated after antigen reencounter in inflammatory conditions, and 
these cells exhibited antigen-dependent suppressive activities. Inflammatory 
arthritis was effectively inhibited through antigen-specific mechanisms. 
Importantly, this strategy did not rely on identification of the initiating 
arthritogenic antigen. Equivalent mechanisms were demonstrated in human 
monocyte-derived DCs, setting the scene for a possible rapid translation of this 
approach to patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
CONCLUSION: This strategy of selective ERK activation resulted in an effective 
therapeutic protocol, with substantial advantages over DC or T cell vaccination.
