Allograft inflammatory factor (AIF)-1 has been identified in chronic rejection 
of rat cardiac allografts and is thought to be involved in the immune response. 
We previously showed that AIF-1 was strongly expressed in synovial tissues in 
rheumatoid arthritis and that rAIF-1 increased the IL-6 production of 
synoviocytes and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Recently, the expression of 
AIF-1 has been reported in systemic sclerosis (SSc) tissues, whose clinical 
features and histopathology are similar to those of chronic graft-vs-host 
disease (GVHD). To clarify the pathogenic mechanism of fibrosis, we examined the 
expression and function of AIF in sclerodermatous (Scl) GVHD mice. We 
demonstrated that immunoreactive AIF-1 and IL-6 were significantly expressed in 
infiltrating mononuclear cells and fibroblasts in thickened skin of Scl GVHD 
mice compared with control. The immunohistochemical findings were confirmed by 
Western blot analysis. Wound healing assay also revealed that rAIF-1 increased 
the migration of normal human dermal fibroblasts (NHDF) directly, but cell 
growth assay did not show that rAIF-1 increased the proliferation of them. These 
findings suggest that AIF-1, which can induce the migration of fibroblasts and 
the production of IL-6 in affected skin tissues, is an important molecule 
promoting fibrosis in GVHD. Although the biological function of AIF-1 has not 
been completely elucidated, AIF-1 can induce IL-6 secretion on mononuclear cells 
and fibroblast chemotaxis. AIF-1 may accordingly provide an attractive new 
target for antifibrotic therapy in SSc as well as Scl GVHD.
