Angiotensin converting enzymes (ACE) and more recently discovered ACE-2 are 
important proteins involved in the renin-angiotensin system. The balance between 
ACE and ACE-2 is important for the regulation of blood pressure and electrolyte 
homeostasis. Inflammatory diseases like rheumatoid arthritis are associated with 
increased risk for cardiovascular complications. We studied the effect of 
inflammation on the expression levels of ACE and ACE-2 in two groups 
(n = 4/group) of adjuvant arthritis (AA) and healthy (control) rats. The AA 
group received 0.2 ml of 50 mg ml(-1) of Mycobacterium butyricum suspended in 
squalene into the tail base. On day 12, rats were euthanized and their organs 
(hearts, liver, kidney, and intestine) were excised. The mRNA of ACE and ACE-2 
were determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction. ACE and ACE-2 protein 
expression in rat heart was determined by Western blot. Inflammation resulted in 
80% reduction of ACE-2 gene expression in rat heart. ACE-2/ACE expression ratio 
was significantly reduced from 0.7 ± 0.4 in control rats to 0.07 ± 0.09 in AA. 
Similarly, ACE-2/ACE protein expression ratio was also disrupted with a 
significant reduction in AA animals (6.7 ± 4.8 vs. 0.9 ± 05 in control and AA, 
respectively). ACE-2 has been found to provide negative feedback of 
renin-angiotensin system and protection of the heart and kidneys. Disruption of 
the balance between ACE and ACE-2 observed in inflammation may be, at least in 
part, involved in the cardiovascular complications seen in patients with 
inflammatory diseases.
