Glucocorticoids (GCs), despite having many undesirable side effects, remain 
effective for the treatment of many inflammatory diseases and are commonly used 
as benchmark drugs in animal models of disease. However, the molecular 
mechanisms underling systemic GC effects in these models are poorly 
characterized. In this study, prednisolone and dexamethasone were evaluated in 
the fully established Lewis rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) model. In AIA, 
adjuvant administration induced polyarticular and systemic inflammation, which 
included spleen and liver. In the liver, multifocal hepatic granulomas were 
observed. To characterize the systemic response and the pathways responsible for 
GC effects, histology, transcriptional profiling, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) 
were performed. There was a decrease in the incidence and histologic severity 
score for granulomas with GC treatment. There was no effect on cellular 
composition of granulomas as assessed by IHC for CD3+ lymphocytes, macrophages, 
and B cells, but there was a significant reduction in infiltrating lymphocytes 
in the hepatic parenchyma. By Affymetrix microarray analysis, 10% of hepatic 
transcripts were altered (P<.01) in livers from AIA rats, with ~31% of them 
partially reversed with treatment with dexamethasone and ~13% with prednisolone. 
Many of these altered hepatic transcripts correspond to human genes that are 
dysregulated in the synovium in human rheumatoid arthritis (RA), indicating that 
the rat AIA model shares features with human RA. These data establish molecular 
changes in the liver and the effect of GCs in rat AIA, which can be used to aid 
in understanding the mechanism of action of novel anti-inflammatory compounds in 
this animal model.
