OBJECTIVES: Increasing evidence suggests that oxidative stress may play a key 
role in joint destruction due to rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim of this 
study was to elucidate the role of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 
(Nrf2), a transcription factor that maintains the cellular defence against 
oxidative stress, in RA.
METHODS: The activation status of Nrf2 was assessed in synovial tissue from 
patients with RA using immunohistochemistry. Antibody-induced arthritis (AIA) 
was induced in Nrf2-knockout and Nrf2-wild-type control mice. The severity of 
cartilage destruction was evaluated using a damage score. The extent of 
oxidative stress, the activation state of Nrf2 and the expression level of Nrf2 
target genes were analysed by immunhistological staining. The expression of 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A was examined on mRNA and protein 
using the Luminex technique. A Xenogen imaging system was used to measure Nrf2 
activity in an antioxidant response element-luciferase transgenic mouse during 
AIA.
RESULTS: Nrf2 was activated in the joints of arthritic mice and of patients with 
RA. Nrf2-knockout mice had more severe cartilage injuries and more oxidative 
damage, and the expression of Nrf2 target genes was enhanced in Nrf2-wild-type 
but not in knockout mice during AIA. Both VEGF-A mRNA and protein expression was 
upregulated in Nrf2-knockout mice during AIA. An unexpected finding was the 
number of spontaneously fractured bones in Nrf2-knockout mice with AIA.
CONCLUSION: These results provide strong evidence that oxidative stress is 
significantly involved in cartilage degradation in experimental arthritis, and 
indicate that the presence of a functional Nrf2 gene is a major requirement for 
limiting cartilage destruction.
