Tolmetin (TMT, CAS 26171-23-3) is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) 
indicated for the relief of signs and symptoms of osteoarthritis, rheumatoid 
arthritis and juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. As TMT causes gastro-intestinal 
side effects like other NSAIDs, its nonacidic prodrug amtolmetin guacil (AMG, 
CAS 87344-06-7) was synthesized. AMG has similar NSAID properties like TMT with 
additional gastroprotective property. The aim of this study was to investigate 
whether TMT and AMG are differentially metabolised in rat and human plasma 
(fresh and acidified) and liver microsomes. TMT was found to be stable in all 
the matrices tested viz., rat and human plasma (fresh and acidified) and liver 
microsomes. AMG was found to be stable only in acidified rat and human plasma. 
On the contrary, in fresh human plasma and human liver microsomes AMG was 
rapidly converted to two metabolites, which were subsequently identified as MED5 
and MED5 methyl ester, without yielding any intact TMT. However, in rat fresh 
plasma and liver microsomes, AMG formed MED5 (predominant) and TMT. To 
corroborate the in vitro findings, in vivo pharmacokinetics (PK) studies were 
done following separate dosing of AMG in both rats and humans. In rats, the PK 
data substantiated that following oral administration of AMG it will be 
converted to TMT resulting in similar PK parameters observed for TMT when it was 
administered alone. In humans, however, AMG yields low levels of TMT which 
substantes the in vitro results. Levels of AMG were not detectable in the 
plasma. These results confirm the species differences in the in vitro and in 
vivo metabolism and disposition of AMG. More research work to further explore 
and understand AMG metabolism in humans is required.
