A major neurotransmitter dopamine transmits signals via five different 
seven-transmembrane G protein-coupled receptors termed D1-D5. Several studies 
have shown that dopamine not only mediates interactions into the nervous system, 
but can contribute to the modulation of immunity via receptors expressed on 
immune cells. We have previously shown an autocrine/paracrine release of 
dopamine by dendritic cells (DCs) during Ag presentation to naive CD4(+) T cells 
and found efficacious results of a D1-like receptor antagonist SCH-23390 in the 
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis mouse model of multiple sclerosis and 
in the NOD mouse model of type I diabetes, with inhibition of Th17 response. 
This study aimed to assess the role of dopaminergic signaling in Th17-mediated 
immune responses and in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In human 
naive CD4(+) T cells, dopamine increased IL-6-dependent IL-17 production via 
D1-like receptors, in response to anti-CD3 plus anti-CD28 mAb. Furthermore, 
dopamine was localized with DCs in the synovial tissue of RA patients and 
significantly increased in RA synovial fluid. In the RA synovial/SCID mouse 
chimera model, although a selective D2-like receptor antagonist haloperidol 
significantly induced accumulation of IL-6(+) and IL-17(+) T cells with 
exacerbated cartilage destruction, SCH-23390 strongly suppressed these 
responses. Taken together, these findings indicate that dopamine released by DCs 
induces IL-6-Th17 axis and causes aggravation of synovial inflammation of RA, 
which is the first time, to our knowledge, that actual evidence has shown the 
pathological relevance of dopaminergic signaling with RA.
