OBJECTIVE: Histone deacetylase inhibitors have shown suppressive effects on 
tumor growth and in some autoimmune diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms 
of their effects are not very clear. The purpose of this study was to 
investigate the effects of trichostatin A (TSA) on collagen-induced rheumatoid 
arthritis (CIA) in a mouse model and its underlying mechanisms.
METHODS: CIA was induced in DBA/1 mice with type II collagen. Paws were scored 
to assess disease severity. Inflammation of joints was evaluated by histological 
examination. Real-time PCR was used to determine cytokine mRNA levels. Cytokine 
production in serum and in supernatants from dendritic to T cell co-cultures was 
measured by ELISA. T cell proliferation was determined using [(3)H] 
incorporation. Intracellular cytokine staining was used to measure interferon 
gamma (IFN-γ)- and interleukin (IL)-4-producing T cells in splenocytes. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation was used to examine histone H3 and H4 acetylation.
RESULTS: TSA potently suppressed the severity of arthritis and type II 
collagen-specific T cell responses in CIA. IFN-γ expression was high in CIA 
mice, but was inhibited by TSA treatment either at the same time as immunization 
or at the onset of arthritis manifestation. T cells from TSA-treated mice 
produced higher levels of IL-4 than cells from the control group. TSA 
predominantly suppressed Th1 cell proliferation in vitro by induction of 
apoptosis. In addition, TSA enhanced IL-4 gene expression of in vitro 
differentiated Th2 cells, and the mechanism is associated with an increased 
level of histone acetylation in the IL-4 gene promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: While TSA selectively suppresses a Th1 response by inducing 
apoptosis, it upregulates IL-4 expression probably by increasing histone H3 and 
H4 acetylation of the IL-4 gene promoter. We conclude that TSA can induce a 
Th1/Th2 balance in vivo and exert protective effects on CIA.
