OBJECTIVE: MicroRNAs (miRNA) are a new class of regulatory elements. Altered 
expression of miRNA has been demonstrated in the inflamed joints of patients 
with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim of this study was to examine the role of 
miRNA in the pathogenesis of autoimmune arthritis, using 2 murine models.
METHODS: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and K/BxN serum-transfer arthritis 
were induced in wild-type (WT) and miR-155-deficient (miR-155(-/-) ) mice. The 
severity of arthritis was determined clinically and histologically. Anticollagen 
antibodies and cytokines were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The 
cellular composition of the draining lymph nodes after induction of CIA was 
measured by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The miR-155(-/-) mice did not develop CIA. Deficiency in miR-155 
prevented the generation of pathogenic autoreactive B and T cells, since 
anticollagen antibodies and the expression levels of antigen-specific T cells 
were strongly reduced in miR-155(-/-) mice. Moreover, Th17 polarization of 
miR-155(-/-) mouse T cells was impaired, as shown by a significant decrease in 
the levels of interleukin-17 (IL-17) and IL-22. In the K/BxN serum-transfer 
arthritis model, which only depends on innate effector mechanisms, miR-155(-/-) 
mice showed significantly reduced local bone destruction, attributed to reduced 
generation of osteoclasts, although the severity of joint inflammation was 
similar to that in WT mice.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that miR-155 is essentially involved in 
the adaptive and innate immune reactions leading to autoimmune arthritis, and 
therefore miR-155 might provide a novel target for the treatment of patients 
with RA.
