Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with the development of autoantibodies to 
citrullinated self-proteins. Citrullinated synovial proteins, which are 
generated via the actions of the protein arginine deiminases (PADs), are known 
to develop in the murine collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model of inflammatory 
arthritis. Given these findings, we evaluated whether 
N-α-benzoyl-N5-(2-chloro-1-iminoethyl)-L-ornithine amide (Cl-amidine), a 
recently described pan-PAD inhibitor, could affect the development of arthritis 
and autoimmunity by treating mice in the CIA model with Cl-amidine on days 0-35. 
Cl-amidine treatment reduced total synovial and serum citrullination, decreased 
clinical disease activity by ∼50%, and significantly decreased IgG2a anti-mouse 
type II collagen Abs. Additionally, histopathology scores and total complement 
C3 deposition were significantly lower in Cl-amidine-treated mice compared with 
vehicle controls. Synovial microarray analyses demonstrated decreased IgG 
reactivity to several native and citrullinated epitopes compared with vehicle 
controls. Cl-amidine treatment had no ameliorative effect on collagen Ab-induced 
arthritis, suggesting its primary protective mechanism was not mediated through 
effector pathways. Reduced levels of citrullinated synovial proteins observed in 
mice treated with Cl-amidine are consistent with the notion that Cl-amidine 
derives its efficacy from its ability to inhibit the deiminating activity of 
PADs. In total, these results suggested that PADs are necessary participants in 
the autoimmune and subsequent inflammatory processes in CIA. Cl-amidine may 
represent a novel class of disease-modifying agents that modulate aberrant 
citrullination, and perhaps other immune processes, necessary for the 
development of inflammatory arthritis.
