Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease characterized by synovial 
inflammation and articular damage. Proinflammatory cytokines, antibodies, and 
matrix-degrading enzymes orchestrate the pathogenic events in autoimmune 
arthritis. Accordingly, these mediators of inflammation are the targets of 
several anti-arthritic drugs. However, the prolonged use of such drugs is 
associated with severe adverse reactions. This limitation has necessitated the 
search for less toxic natural plant products that possess anti-arthritic 
activity. Furthermore, it is imperative that the mechanism of action of such 
products be explored before they can be recommended for further preclinical 
testing. Using the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis model of human RA, we 
demonstrate that celastrol derived from Celastrus has potent anti-arthritic 
activity. This suppression of arthritis is mediated via modulation of the key 
proinflammatory cytokines (IL-17, IL-6, and IFN-Î³) in response to the 
disease-related antigens, of the IL-6/IL-17-related transcription factor STAT3, 
of antibodies directed against cyclic citrullinated peptides and Bhsp65, and of 
the activity of matrix metalloproteinase-9 and phospho-ERK. Most of the clinical 
and mechanistic attributes of celastrol are similar to those of Celastrus 
extract. Several studies have addressed the antitumor activity of celastrol. Our 
study highlights the anti-arthritic activity of Celastrus-derived celastrol and 
the underlying mechanisms. These results provide a strong rationale for further 
testing and validation of the use of celastrol and the natural plant extract 
from Celastrus as an adjunct (with conventional drugs) or alternative modality 
for the treatment of RA.
