OBJECTIVE: Reduced vitamin D intake has been linked to increased susceptibility 
to develop rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and vitamin D deficiency is associated with 
increased disease activity in RA patients. The pathophysiological role of 
vitamin D in joint inflammation is, however, unclear.
METHODS: To determine the influence of absent vitamin D signalling in chronic 
arthritis, vitamin D receptor (VDR)-deficient mice were crossed with human 
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) transgenic mice (hTNFtg), which spontaneously 
develop chronic arthritis.
RESULTS: Clinical signs and symptoms of chronic arthritis were aggravated in 
hTNFtg mice lacking functional VDR signalling. Moreover, synovial inflammation 
was clearly increased in VDR(-/-)hTNFtg mice as compared to hTNFtg mice and was 
associated with an increased macrophage influx in inflamed joints. In vitro, 
VDR-deficient monocytes were proinflammatory and hyper-responsive to TNF 
stimulation associated with prolonged mitogen-activated protein kinase 
activation and cytokine secretion. Also, VDR(-/-) monocytes showed enhanced 
potential to differentiate into bone resorbing osteoclasts in vitro. In line, 
VDR(-/-)hTNFtg mice had significantly increased cartilage damage and synovial 
bone erosions.
CONCLUSIONS: VDR plays an important role in limiting the inflammatory phenotype 
in a mouse model of RA. Absent VDR signalling causes a proinflammatory monocyte 
phenotype associated with increased inflammation, cartilage damage and bone 
erosion.
