INTRODUCTION: Folate receptor (FR)-expressing macrophages have been shown to 
accumulate at sites of inflammation, where they promote development of 
inflammatory symptoms. To target such a macrophage population, we designed and 
evaluated the biologic activity of EC0746, a novel folic acid conjugate of the 
highly potent antifolate, aminopterin.
METHODS: Using a FR-positive subclone of murine macrophage-derived RAW264.7 
cells and rat thioglycollate-elicited macrophages, we studied the effect of 
EC0746 on dihydrofolate reductase activity, cell proliferation, and cellular 
response towards bacterial lipopolysaccharide as well as IFNÎ³ activation. The 
EC0746 anti-inflammatory activity, pharmacokinetics, and toxicity were also 
evaluated in normal rats or in rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis; that is, a 
FR-positive macrophage model that closely resembles rheumatoid arthritis in 
humans.
RESULTS: EC0746 suppresses the proliferation of RAW264.7 cells and prevents the 
ability of nonproliferating rat macrophages to respond to inflammatory stimuli. 
In the macrophage-rich rat arthritis model, brief treatment with subcutaneously 
administered EC0746 is shown to mediate an FR-specific anti-inflammatory 
response that is more potent than either orally administered methotrexate or 
subcutaneously delivered etanercept. More importantly, EC0746 therapy is also 
shown to be ~40-fold less toxic than unmodified aminopterin, with fewer bone 
marrow and gastrointestinal problems.
CONCLUSIONS: EC0746 is the first high FR-binding dihydrofolate reductase 
inhibitor that demonstrates FR-specific anti-inflammatory activities both in 
vitro and in vivo. Our data reveal that a relatively toxic anti-inflammatory 
drug, such as aminopterin, can be targeted with folic acid to inflammatory 
macrophages and thereby relieve inflammatory symptoms with greatly reduced 
toxicity.
