Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) plays a critical role in the development, 
differentiation, and proliferation of B-lineage cells, making it an attractive 
target for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. The objective of this study 
was to evaluate the antiarthritis effect of GDC-0834 
[R-N-(3-(6-(4-(1,4-dimethyl-3-oxopiperazin-2-yl)phenylamino)-4-methyl-5-oxo-4,5-dihydropyrazin-2-yl)-2-methylphenyl)-4,5,6,7-tetrahydrobenzo[b]thiophene-2-carboxamide], 
a potent and selective BTK inhibitor, and characterize the relationship between 
inhibition of BTK phosphorylation (pBTK) and efficacy. GDC-0834 inhibited BTK 
with an in vitro IC(50) of 5.9 and 6.4 nM in biochemical and cellular assays, 
respectively, and in vivo IC(50) of 1.1 and 5.6 Î¼M in mouse and rat, 
respectively. Administration of GDC-0834 (30-100 mg/kg) in a rat 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model resulted in a dose-dependent decrease of 
ankle swelling and reduction of morphologic pathology. An integrated disease 
progression pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic model where efficacy is driven by 
pBTK inhibition was fit to ankle-diameter time-course data. This model 
incorporated a transit model to characterize nondrug-related decreases in ankle 
swelling occurring at later stages of disease progression in CIA rats. The time 
course of ankle swelling in vehicle animals was described well by the base 
model. Simultaneous fitting of data from vehicle- and GDC-0834-treated groups 
showed that overall 73% inhibition of pBTK was needed to decrease the rate 
constant describing the ankle swelling increase (k(in)) by half. These findings 
suggest a high degree of pBTK inhibition is required for maximal activity of the 
pathway on inflammatory arthritis in rats.
