Inflammation-driven immune dysfunction supports the development of several 
chronic human disorders including inflammatory bowel diseases and rheumatoid 
arthritis. Macrolides are effective antibiotics endowed with immunomodulatory 
effects. In this study we report the chemical synthesis and the pharmacological 
characterization of CSY0073, a non-antibiotic derivative of azithromycin. 
CSY0073 was tested for efficacy in two experimental models of colitis induced by 
administering mice with dextran sulfate (DSS) and trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid 
(TNBS) and in collagen induced arthritis. Like azithromycin, CSY0073 improved 
clinical, macroscopic and histopathological scores in mice administered DSS 
(12.5μmol/kg/day p.o.) and TNBS (45μmol/kg/day p.o.). When administered to 
TNBS-treated mice, CSY0073 effectively attenuated influx of neutrophils and 
macrophages into the colonic mucosa and reduced the intestinal expression 
pro-inflammatory cytokines TNFα, IL-2 and IFNγ. CSY0073 (0.1 to 10μM) 
counter-regulated TNFα, IFNγ, IL-12 and IL-23 release caused by exposure of 
mouse spleen monocytes and CD11b+ cells isolated from the colonic lamina propria 
to endotoxin. CSY0073 (25μmol/kg/day) reduced clinical scores in the collagen 
induced murine model of rheumatoid arthritis. In myeloid cells, CSY0073 (10μM) 
prevented the nuclear translocation of the p65 subunit of NF-κB and its binding 
to canonical NF-κB responsive elements. In summary, we report a novel class of 
non-antibiotic 14-member macrocycles with anti-inflammatory and 
immune-modulatory effects. CSY0073, the prototype of this new class of 
macrolides exerts counter-regulatory activity on NF-κB signaling. This study 
suggests the exploitation of non-antibiotic macrolides in the treatment of 
inflammatory disorders characterized by immune dysfunction.
