OBJECTIVE: Neutrophil accumulation contributes to the pathogenesis of rheumatoid 
arthritis. This study was undertaken to examine the ability of H2O2 to influence 
neutrophilic inflammation in a model of antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) in mice.
METHODS: AIA was induced by administration of antigen into the knee joints of 
previously immunized mice. Neutrophil accumulation was measured by counting 
neutrophils in the synovial cavity and assaying myeloperoxidase activity in the 
tissue surrounding the mouse knee joint. Apoptosis was determined by morphologic 
and molecular techniques. The role of H2O2 was studied using mice that do not 
produce reactive oxygen species (gp91phox-/- mice) and drugs that enhance the 
generation or enhance the degradation of H2O2.
RESULTS: Antigen challenge of immunized mice induced neutrophil accumulation 
that peaked at 12-24 hours after challenge. H2O2 production peaked at 24 hours, 
after which time, the inflammation resolved. Neutrophil recruitment was similar 
in wild-type and gp91phox-/- mice, but there was delayed resolution in 
gp91phox-/- mice or after administration of catalase. In contrast, 
administration of H2O2 or superoxide dismutase (SOD) resolved neutrophilic 
inflammation. The resolution of inflammation induced by SOD or H2O2 was 
accompanied by an increase in the number of apoptotic neutrophils. Apoptosis was 
associated with an increase in Bax and caspase 3 cleavage and was secondary to 
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt activation.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that levels of H2O2 increase during neutrophil 
influx and are necessary for the natural resolution of neutrophilic 
inflammation. Mechanistically, enhanced levels of H2O2 (endogenous or exogenous) 
inhibit p-Akt/NF-ÎºB and induce apoptosis of migrated neutrophils. Modulation of 
H2O2 production may represent a novel strategy for controlling neutrophilic 
inflammation in the joints.
