OBJECTIVE: Blood C-reactive protein (CRP) is routinely measured to gauge 
inflammation. In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a heightened CRP level is predictive 
of a poor outcome, while a lowered CRP level is indicative of a positive 
response to therapy. CRP interacts with the innate and adaptive immune systems 
in ways that suggest it may be causal in RA and, although this is not proven, it 
is widely assumed that CRP makes a detrimental contribution to the disease 
process. Paradoxically, results from animal studies have indicated that CRP 
might be beneficial in RA. This study was undertaken to study the role of CRP in 
a mouse model of RA, the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model.
METHODS: We compared the impact of CRP deficiency with that of transgenic 
overexpression of CRP on inflammatory and immune responses in mice, using 
CRP-deficient (Crp-/-) and human CRP-transgenic (CRP-Tg) mice, respectively. 
Susceptibility to CIA, a disease that resembles RA in humans, was compared 
between wild-type, Crp-/-, and CRP-Tg mice.
RESULTS: CRP deficiency significantly altered the inflammatory cytokine response 
evoked by challenge with endotoxin or anti-CD3 antibody, and heightened some 
immune responses. Compared to that in wild-type mice, CIA in Crp-/- mice 
progressed more rapidly and was more severe, whereas CIA in CRP-Tg mice was 
dramatically attenuated. Despite these disparate clinical outcomes, anticollagen 
autoantibody responses during CIA did not differ among the genotypes.
CONCLUSION: CRP exerts an early and beneficial effect in mice with CIA. The 
mechanism of this effect remains unknown but does not involve improvement of the 
autoantibody profile. In humans, the presumed detrimental role of a heightened 
blood CRP level during active RA might be balanced by a beneficial effect of the 
baseline CRP (i.e., levels manifest during the preclinical stages of disease).
