The mass and function of bones depend on the maintenance of a complicated 
balance between osteoclast-mediated bone resorption and osteoblast-mediated bone 
formation. An inhibitor of osteoclast differentiation and/or function is 
expected to be useful for treatment of bone lytic diseases such as osteoporosis, 
rheumatoid arthritis, and tumor metastasis into bone. Biselyngbyaside is a 
recently isolated macrolide compound from marine cyanobacteria Lyngbya sp. that 
shows wide-spectrum cytotoxicity toward human tumor cell lines. In this study, 
we investigated the effects of biselyngbyaside on osteoclast differentiation and 
function. Biselyngbyaside inhibited receptor activator of nuclear factor-ÎºB 
ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclastogenesis in mouse monocytic RAW264 cells and 
primary bone marrow-derived macrophages at a low concentration. Similarly, 
biselyngbyaside suppressed osteoblastic cell-mediated osteoclast differentiation 
in cocultures. In the RANKL-induced signaling pathway, biselyngbyaside inhibited 
the expression of c-Fos and NFATc1, which are important transcription factors in 
osteoclast differentiation. In mature osteoclasts, biselyngbyaside decreased 
resorption-pit formation. Biselyngbyaside also induced apoptosis accompanied by 
the induction of caspase-3 activation and nuclear condensation, and these 
effects were negated by the pancaspase inhibitor z-VAD-FMK. Taken together, the 
present findings indicate that biselyngbyaside suppresses bone resorption via 
inhibition of osteoclastogenesis and induction of apoptosis. Thus, 
biselyngbyaside may be useful for the prevention of bone lytic diseases.
