INTRODUCTION: Hypoxia is a feature of the inflamed synovium in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Intra-articular injection of hyaluronan (HA) may be considered a 
potential way to treat RA. However, the exact molecular mechanism of HA on 
decreased cellular responses to hypoxic environment is unclear. The present 
study has been designed to use the adjuvant-induced arthritis model to examine 
the effects of HA on the changes of immunohistochemical expressions of 
hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha), inducible nitric oxide synthase 
(iNOS), and matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP3) in the synovial tissues at the 
early phase of arthritic inflammation.
METHODS: Monoarthritis was induced in adult male Sprague-Dawley (250-300 g) via 
intraarticular injection of complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) into the 
tibiotarsal joint. The CFA-induction arthritis animals were divided into three 
groups: treatment (intraarticular injection of HA), placebo (intraarticular 
injection of saline) and controls (no treatments). Functional evaluations of 
edema and pain behavior, histology, and HIF-1alpha, iNOS, and MMP3 
immunohistochemistry were performed before, after the first injection, three 
injections, and on the follow-up injection of the treatments.
RESULTS: Intra-articular injection of HA also significantly suppressed the 
mechanical allodynia (p < 0.001) and overexpressions of HIF-1alpha (p < 0.001), 
iNOS (p = 0.004) and MMP3 (p < 0.001) immunoreactivity in synovium.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that early intervention of HA is an 
effective protection against accumulation of inflammation-induced HIF-1alpha, 
iNOS, and MMP3 to limit erosive damage in CFA-induced model of arthritis.
