OBJECTIVE: To investigate the density of sympathetic nerve fibers in and the 
metabolic activation of fat tissue surrounding human synovium in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA)/osteoarthritis (OA) and in the draining lymph nodes of arthritic 
and normal mice.
METHODS: Using immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry, the density of 
sympathetic nerve fibers and the presence of nerve repellent factors were 
investigated. The metabolic activation of fat tissue was estimated by the 
occurrence of small-vacuole adipocytes, expression of β3-adrenoceptors, and 
adipose tissue weight.
RESULTS: The density of sympathetic nerve fibers was markedly increased in fat 
tissue surrounding RA synovium compared with that in fat tissue surrounding OA 
synovium. In adipose tissue adjacent to draining lymph nodes, the density of 
sympathetic nerve fibers was higher in arthritic mice compared with normal mice. 
In human synovium and mouse draining lymph nodes, the 2 sympathetic nerve 
repellent factors, semaphorin 3C and semaphorin 3F, were highly expressed. In 
arthritic compared with normal mice, the fat tissue around lymph nodes was 
markedly lighter, adipocytes had more fragmented lipid droplets, and fat tissue 
demonstrated high expression of β3-adrenoceptors.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrated an increased density of sympathetic nerve 
fibers in metabolically activated fat tissue surrounding human RA synovium and 
the draining lymph nodes of arthritic mice. Because sympathetic 
neurotransmitters stimulate lipolysis, the repulsion of sympathetic nerve fibers 
from inflamed regions and their increased occurrence in fat tissue probably 
represent an adaptive program to support the proinflammatory process by 
releasing energy-rich substrates.
