OBJECTIVES: To investigate the quantitative arthritic and bone erosive changes, 
including the number of osteoclasts and osteoclast precursors in the new 
SKG-model of inflammatory polyarthritis using three-dimensional (3D) 
stereological methods.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in female SKG-mice with Zymosan A. Quantitative 
histology was made in four control mice and four mice with arthritis euthanised 
after 6 and 12 weeks. The right hind paw was embedded undecalcified in 
methylmethacrylate and cut exhaustively generating vertical uniform random 
sections. A computer controlled microscope and stereological software was used 
for histological quantification. Total volumes were estimated according to the 
Cavalieri principle, total surfaces were estimated using the vertical sections 
design, and the number of osteoclasts was counted in a physical fractionator.
RESULTS: The arthritis score increased during the 12-week period and was 
paralleled by an increase in the volume of inflammatory tissue (r=0.96, 
p<0.001). The number of osteoclasts on bone (r=0.77, p<0.05) and 
osteoclast-covered bone surface (r=0.62, p<0.05) increased resulting in a 
decrease in the volume of bone (r=-0.65, p<0.05). However, the number of 
osteoclast precursors declined between week 6 and 12 (p<0.05). Furthermore, the 
total cartilage surface (r=-0.74, p<0.05) and cartilage volume (r=-0.74, p<0.05) 
decreased during the 12 weeks of arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study we demonstrated changes in 3D stereological 
parameters of inflammatory tissue, bone erosion, osteoclasts, and cartilage in 
mouse paws during the course of arthritis in the SKG mouse. This is the first 
time 3D quantitative histology has been applied in a mouse model of rheumatoid 
arthritis.
