OBJECTIVE: Treatment options for rheumatoid arthritis range from symptomatic 
approaches to modern molecular interventions such as inhibition of inflammatory 
mediators. Inhibition of inflammation by platelet-rich plasma (PRP) has been 
proposed as a treatment for tendinitis and osteoarthritis. The present study was 
undertaken to investigate the effect of PRP on antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) 
of the knee joint in a large animal model.
METHODS: Six-month-old pigs (n = 10) were systemically immunized by bovine serum 
albumin (BSA) injection, and arthritis was induced by intraarticular BSA 
injection. PRP was injected into the knee joints of 5 of the animals after 2 
weeks. An additional 5 animals received no systemic immunization (controls). 
Signs of arthritis were documented by plain histologic analysis, Safranin O 
staining, and immunohistochemistry analysis for type II collagen (CII), 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). 
Interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6, tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), VEGF, and 
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) protein content was measured by Luminex 
assay.
RESULTS: In the pigs with AIA, plain histologic analysis revealed severe 
arthritic changes in the synovium. Safranin O and CII staining showed decreased 
proteoglycan and CII content in cartilage. Immunohistochemistry analysis 
revealed increased levels of IL-6 and VEGF in synovium and cartilage, and 
protein concentrations of IL-6, VEGF, IL-1β, and IGF-1 in synovium and cartilage 
were elevated as well; in addition, TNFα protein was increased in cartilage. 
Treatment with PRP led to attenuation of these arthritic changes in the synovium 
and cartilage.
CONCLUSION: We have described a porcine model of AIA. Experiments using this 
model demonstrated that PRP can attenuate arthritic changes as assessed 
histologically and based on protein synthesis of typical inflammatory mediators 
in the synovial membrane and cartilage.
