Leaf extracts of Ficus exasperata P. Beauv. (Moraceae) are commonly used in 
Ghanaian traditional medicine for the treatment of several pathological states 
including inflammatory disorders. The present study was undertaken to evaluate 
the antiarthritic effect of an ethanolic extract of F. exasperata (FEE) in the 
Freund's adjuvant-induced arthritis model in rats. Since free radicals and 
reactive oxygen species are implicated in inflammatory joint diseases such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, the antioxidant potential of the extract was investigated 
in in vitro experimental models. FEE as well as the positive controls, 
dexamethasone and methotrexate, showed significant dose-dependent antiarthritic 
properties when applied to established adjuvant arthritis. Oral administration 
of FEE (30-300 mg/kg p.o.) significantly reduced the arthritic edema in the 
ipsilateral paw of rats with a maximal inhibition of 34.46 ± 11.42%. FEE (30-300 
mg/kg p.o.) also significantly prevented the spread of the edema from the 
ipsilateral to the contralateral paws indicating inhibition of systemic spread. 
The disease-modifying antirheumatic drug methotrexate (0.1-1 mg/kg i.p.) and the 
steroidal anti-inflammatory agent dexamethasone (0.3-3 mg/kg i.p.) also reduced 
very significantly the total polyarthritic edema as well as the spread of the 
arthritis from the ipsilateral to the contralateral paws of the treated animals. 
The extract also exhibited reducing activity (EC(50) = 8.105 ± 18.49), scavenged 
2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH, EC(50) = 0.499 ± 0.302) and prevented lipid 
peroxidation (IC(50) = 1.283 ± 0.923) in rat brain homogenates. Phenols were 
detected in the extract. These results suggest that ethanolic extract of the 
leaves of F. exasperata exerts antiarthritic activity after oral administration 
and also has antioxidant properties which may contribute to its activity.
