OBJECTIVE: CXCL10 is expressed in increased levels in highly invasive 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) from arthritic DA rats and from patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). This study was undertaken to analyze the role of 
CXCL10 and its receptor CXCR3 in regulation of the invasive properties of FLS.
METHODS: FLS were isolated from synovial tissue of RA patients and from DA rats 
and arthritis-resistant DA.F344(Cia5d) rats with pristane-induced arthritis. We 
used an in vitro model of invasion through Matrigel, which has been shown to 
correlate with articular damage in RA and in rat arthritis. FLS were cultured in 
the presence or absence of CXCL10, anti-CXCR3 antibody, or the CXCR3 inhibitor 
AMG487 and then studied for invasion, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) production 
(MMPs 1-3), intracellular calcium influx, and cell morphology.
RESULTS: DA rat FLS produced higher levels of CXCL10 compared with minimally 
invasive FLS from DA.F344(Cia5d) rats. CXCL10 treatment increased the 
invasiveness of FLS from DA.F344(Cia5d) rats by 2-fold, and this increase was 
blocked by anti-CXCR3. Both anti-CXCR3 and AMG487 reduced invasiveness of FLS 
from DA rats, by as much as 77%. AMG487 significantly reduced invasiveness of RA 
FLS (by 58%). CXCR3 blockade reduced levels of MMP-1 by 65%, inhibited receptor 
signaling (64-100% reduction in intracellular calcium influx), and interfered 
with actin cytoskeleton reorganization and lamellipodia formation in FLS from 
rats and RA patients.
CONCLUSION: We describe and characterize a new autocrine/paracrine role of 
CXCL10/CXCR3 in the regulation of FLS invasion in rats with arthritis and in RA 
patients. These observations suggest that the CXCL10/CXCR3 axis is a potential 
new target for therapies aimed at reducing FLS invasion and its associated joint 
damage and pannus invasion and destruction in RA.
