Taurine chloramine (TauCl) is produced by activated neutrophils in the 
inflammatory joint cavities of rheumatoid arthritis and is known to have 
anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic effects. However, the mechanisms underlying 
the anti-arthritic effect of TauCl have not been elucidated. Here, we 
investigated that mechanism using a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse 
model. DBA/1J mice were immunized with bovine type II collagen to induce CIA and 
were given daily subcutaneous injections of TauCl from the day of first collagen 
immunization. Severity of arthritis was scored by paw swelling and the arthritis 
score system. At the 8th week, mice were sacrificed for histological examination 
using hematoxylin and eosin, safranin-O and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 
(TRAP) staining. Effects of TauCl on osteoclastogenesis from bone marrow-derived 
preosteoclasts and proliferation of the lymphocytes obtained from spleens of CIA 
mice were determined. TauCl significantly attenuated the severity of paw 
swelling and reduced arthritis score in CIA mice. TauCl treated CIA mice showed 
significant reductions of synovial inflammation, cartilage damage and bone 
erosion. The number of TRAP-positive cells in the joints of TauCl treated CIA 
mice was reduced. TauCl inhibited osteoclastogenesis from the RANKL treated bone 
marrow-derived preosteoclasts in a dose-dependent manner. TauCl also inhibited 
the proliferation of splenic lymphocytes obtained from CIA mice. In conclusion, 
TauCl attenuated the severity of CIA by inhibiting lymphocyte proliferation and 
osteoclastogenesis. Combined our results suggest that TauCl produced 
endogenously in inflamed joints may suppress the development of rheumatoid 
arthritis and that TauCl may be used for therapeutic treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis.
