Invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells are innate lymphocytes with unique 
reactivity to glycolipid antigens bound to non-polymorphic CD1d molecules. They 
are capable of rapidly releasing pro- and/or anti-inflammatory cytokines and 
constitute attractive targets for immunotherapy of a wide range of diseases 
including autoimmune disorders. In this study, we have explored the beneficial 
effects of OCH, a Th2-polarizing glycolipid agonist of iNKT cells, in a 
humanized mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in which citrullinated human 
proteins are targeted by autoaggressive immune responses in mice expressing an 
RA susceptibility human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DR4 molecule. We found for the 
first time that treatment with OCH both prevents and cures citrulline-induced 
autoimmune arthritis as evidenced by resolved ankle swelling and reversed 
histopathological changes associated with arthritis. Also importantly, OCH 
treatment blocked the arthritogenic capacity of citrullinated 
antigen-experienced splenocytes without compromising their global responsiveness 
or altering the proportion of splenic naturally occurring CD4(+)CD25(+)FoxP3(+) 
regulatory T cells. Interestingly, administering the Th1-promoting iNKT cell 
glycolipid ligand Î±-C-galactosylceramide into HLA-DR4 transgenic mice increased 
the incidence of arthritis in these animals and exacerbated their clinical 
symptoms, strongly suggesting a role for Th1 responses in the pathogenesis of 
citrulline-induced arthritis. Therefore, our findings indicate a role for 
Th1-mediated immunopathology in citrulline-induced arthritis and provide the 
first evidence that iNKT cell manipulation by Th2-skewing glycolipids may be of 
therapeutic value in this clinically relevant model, a finding that is 
potentially translatable to human RA.
