INTRODUCTION: Autoimmune inflammation is a characteristic feature of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and other autoimmune diseases. In the natural course of human 
autoimmune diseases, it is rather difficult to pinpoint the precise timing of 
the initial event that triggers the cascade of pathogenic events that later 
culminate into clinically overt disease. Therefore, it is a challenge to examine 
the early preclinical events in these disorders. Animal models are an invaluable 
resource in this regard. Furthermore, considering the complex nature of the 
pathogenic immune events in arthritis, microarray analysis offers a versatile 
tool to define the dynamic patterns of gene expression during the disease 
course.
METHODS: In this study, we defined the profiles of gene expression at different 
phases of adjuvant arthritis (AA) in Lewis rats and compared them with those of 
antigen mycobacterial heat shock protein 65 (Bhsp65)-tolerized syngeneic rats. 
Purified total RNA (100 ng) extracted from the draining lymph node cells was 
used to generate biotin-labeled fragment cRNA, which was then hybridized with an 
oligonucleotide-based DNA microarray chip. Significance analysis of microarrays 
was used to compare gene expression levels between the two different groups by 
limiting the false discovery rate to < 5%. Some of the data were further 
analyzed using a fold change â‰¥2.0 as the cutoff. The gene expression of select 
genes was validated by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Intriguingly, the most dramatic changes in gene expression in the 
draining lymphoid tissue ex vivo were observed at the preclinical (incubation) 
phase of the disease. The affected genes represented many of the known proteins 
that participate in the cellular immune response. Interestingly, the preclinical 
gene expression profile was significantly altered by a disease-modulating, 
antigen-based tolerogenic regimen. The changes mostly included upregulation of 
several genes, suggesting that immune tolerance suppressed disease by activating 
disease-regulating pathways. We identified a molecular signature comprising at 
least 12 arthritis-related genes altered by Bhsp65-induced tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of microarray analysis in the rat AA 
model. The results of this study not only advance our understanding of the early 
phase events in autoimmune arthritis but also help in identifying potential 
targets for the immunomodulation of RA.
