INTRODUCTION: Binding immunoglobulin protein (BiP) has previously shown powerful 
anti-inflammatory properties in the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model, 
where a single dose of BiP has proved to be both a long-term prophylactic and 
therapeutic. In both CIA and human in vitro studies, BiP induced regulatory T 
cells. The present investigation looked at the anti-inflammatory effect of BiP 
on inflamed human synovial tissue transplanted into severe combined 
immunodeficient mice (SCID), a chimaeric in vivo model previously used to test 
the efficacy of biologic therapies.
METHODS: Rheumatoid arthritis synovial membrane (RASM) was engrafted into SCID 
mice. Following successful engraftment, mice were intravenously injected with 
BiP or human serum albumin in the presence or absence of anti-IL-10 mAb. Twelve 
days later the grafts were removed for analysis and human cytokines in the sera 
were quantified by ELISA. The extent of residual inflammatory cellular 
infiltrate in the synovial explants was determined by weight of the explants.
RESULTS: The RASM transplants from mice treated with BiP showed visual reduction 
in cellular infiltrate and downregulation of all quantifiable features of 
inflammation as assessed by the Koizumi or Rooney histological criteria. Also 
downregulated were HLA-DR, CD86, IL-6 and TNFÎ± expression as assessed by 
immunohistology. ELISA detected significantly less human IL-6 circulating in the 
BiP-treated mouse serum. After removal of transplanted tissue 12 days post 
administration of BiP, the RASM explants from the BiP-treated SCID mice weighed 
significantly less, indicating a suppression of tissue inflammation. Mice given 
concomitant neutralising anti-IL-10 antibody and BiP showed no such suppression.
CONCLUSIONS: BiP has anti-inflammatory properties partially dependent on the 
downregulation of HLA-DR and co-stimulatory molecules and the predominant 
production of IL-10.
