Effective detection of potential nephrotoxicity is crucial for pre-clinical drug 
development. We evaluated a sensitive animal model for drug-induced kidney 
injury, which includes hemi-nephrectomy of mice. Although bucillamine and 
d-penicillamine are used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in Japan, 
drug-related adverse effects on the kidney can limit their therapeutic 
utilities. When bucillamine (1000 or 2000 mg/kg/day) or d-penicillamine (2000 
mg/kg/day) were orally administered to hemi-nephrectomised BALB/c mice, the 
urinary protein levels of bucillamine-treated mice, but not of those treated 
with d-penicillamine, the vehicle, or in bucillamine treated unnephrectomized 
mice, were significantly increased and remained high during the 4-week 
drug-loading period. Membranous glomerulonephropathy occasionally seen in 
bucillamine/d-penicillamine-treated arthritis patients was not reproduced in 
mice. Instead, our mouse model showed proximal tubular injury and podocyte foot 
process effacement in the bucillamine-treated kidneys. These two cell types are 
also the primary targets of the experimental Heymann membranous 
glomerulonephropathy. Gene expression profiling of the bucillamine-treated mice 
identified lipocalin 2 as a significantly up-regulated transcript together with 
cytochrome P450 CYP4a14, a group-specific component, and proprotein convertase 
subtilisin/kexin type 9. Moreover, large amounts of lipocalin 2 were detected in 
the urine of the bucillamine-treated mice, but not in the hemi-nephrectomised 
control mice. These results indicate that hemi-nephrectomy effectively promotes 
acute kidney injury by bucillamine, which is accompanied by up-regulation of the 
urinary biomarker lipocalin 2. Our mouse model with initial stage of kidney 
injury should be useful to analyse the pathogenesis of drug-induced glomerular 
and tubular injuries.
