Sexual dimorphism is a well-established phenomenon in rheumatoid arthritis, with 
women exhibiting higher disease severity. Understanding the role of sex hormones 
using in vivo animal models is limited due to the systemic effects as well as 
the difficulty in exploring different dose combinations of the hormones 
simultaneously. However, cell culture systems pose ideal systems for exploring 
different combinations and concentrations of the hormones simultaneously. In 
this study, the procedure for isolation of arthritic fibroblasts was 
standardized using a combination of collagenase and trypsin based on maximal 
yield and viability after employing different enzymatic disaggregation 
procedures. The cultured synovial fibroblasts from arthritic rats did not differ 
significantly from normal rat fibroblasts in terms of proliferation or secretion 
of inflammatory mediators. Stimulation of fibroblasts with TNF-α was 
standardized and TNF-α stimulated rat arthritic synovial fibroblasts exhibited 
an ideal in vitro system for screening antiinflammatory molecules. The effects 
of physiological and pharmacological concentrations of testosterone, estrogen 
and progesterone were studied on TNF-α induced cellular damage in rat arthritic 
synovial fibroblasts. The results showed that estrogen and testosterone exerted 
antiinflammatory effects on rat arthritic synovial fibroblasts at physiological 
and pharmacological concentrations. However, there was no significant difference 
in the effects between physiological and pharmacological concentrations. 
Progesterone independently did not show any protective effects. In combination 
with physiological concentrations of estrogen, progesterone abrogated estrogen's 
protective effect but it exhibited protection in combination with 
pharmacological concentrations of estrogen.
