Antigen-based therapies (ABTs) very effectively prevent the development of type 
1 diabetes (T1D) when given to young nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice, however, they 
have little or no ability to reverse hyperglycemia in newly diabetic NOD mice. 
More importantly, ABTs have not yet demonstrated an ability to effectively 
preserve residual ß-cells in individuals newly diagnosed with type 1 diabetes 
(T1D). Accordingly, there is great interest in identifying new treatments that 
can be combined with ABTs to safely protect ß-cells in diabetic animals. The 
activation of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors (GABA-Rs) on immune cells has 
been shown to prevent T1D, experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) and 
rheumatoid arthritis in mouse models. Based on GABA's ability to inhibit 
different autoimmune diseases and its safety profile, we tested whether the 
combination of ABT with GABA treatment could prolong the survival of 
transplanted ß-cells in newly diabetic NOD mice. Newly diabetic NOD mice were 
untreated, or given GAD/alum (20 or 100 µg) and placed on plain drinking water, 
or water containing GABA (2 or 6 mg/ml). Twenty-eight days later, they received 
syngenic pancreas grafts and were monitored for the recurrence of hyperglycemia. 
Hyperglycemia reoccurred in the recipients given plain water, GAD monotherapy, 
GABA monotherapy, GAD (20 µg)+GABA (2 mg/ml), GAD (20 µg)+GABA (6 mg/ml) and GAD 
(100 µg)+GABA (6 mg/ml) about 1, 2-3, 3, 2-3, 3-8 and 10-11 weeks 
post-transplantation, respectively. Thus, combined GABA and ABT treatment had a 
synergistic effect in a dose-dependent fashion. These findings suggest that 
co-treatment with GABA (or other GABA-R agonists) may provide a new strategy to 
safely enhance the efficacy of other therapeutics designed to prevent or reverse 
T1D, as well as other T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases.
