BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Majoon Suranjan (MS) is a polyherbal formulation used 
in Unani system of medicine for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The 
present study evaluates the antiarthritic efficacy of this formulation in three 
different experimental models.
METHODS: The anti-inflammatory activity of MS (in doses of 450, 900 and 1800 
mg/kg body wt) was evaluated using the turpentine oil induced paw oedema model 
and the antiarthritic efficacy was evaluated using the formaldehyde and complete 
Freund's adjuvant (CFA) induced arthritis models. Aspirin (100 mg/kg body wt) 
was used as the standard drug in all the models. In order to assess the safety 
of the test drug, oral acute and 28 day toxicity studies were also carried out.
RESULTS: MS produced a dose dependent protective effect in all the experimental 
models. Its antiarthritic efficacy was comparable to aspirin in formaldehyde 
induced arthritis and was superior to aspirin in turpentine oil induced paw 
oedema and CFA induced arthritis. MS also inhibited the delayed increase in 
joint diameter as seen in control and aspirin treated animals in CFA induced 
arthritis. Oral LD 50 of MS was found to be >5000 mg/kg in rats. Chronic 
administration did not produce any significant physiological changes in the 
tested animals.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: Results of the present study suggest that the 
antiarthritic activity of MS was due to the interplay between its 
anti-inflammatory and disease modifying activities, thus supporting its use in 
traditional medicine for the treatment of RA.
