BACKGROUND: Treatment of Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA) has improved 
quality of life in children and adolescents with JIA. Standardisation of care 
offers the chance to improve the quality of care of those patients. New studies 
have been published after completion of our last treatment guideline (2007). An 
updated consensus process is mandatory.
METHODS: A systematic literature analysis in PUBMED (key words: juvenile 
idiopathic (rheumatoid) arthritis, therapy; limits: humans, published in the 
last 3 years, all child 0-18 years, clinical trial) revealed 17 relevant 
studies. Studies relating to diagnosis of JIA, Uveitis, vaccination, transition 
were excluded. Representatives nominated by scientific societies and 
organisations were invited to consensus conferences which were hosted by a 
professional moderator. The following societies were invited: Berufsverband der 
Kinder- und Jugendärzte (BVKJ), Deutsche Gesellschaft für Kinder- und 
Jugendmedizin (DGKJ), Deutsche Gesellschaft für Rheumatologie (DGRh), Deutsche 
Ophthalmologische Gesellschaft (DOG), Deutsche Rheuma-Liga Bundesverband, Verein 
zur Förderung und Unterstützung rheumatologisch erkrankter Kinder und deren 
Eltern, Vereinigung für Kinderorthopädie, Zentraler Verband der 
Physiotherapeuten und Krankengymnasten (ZVK). Consensus conferences were each 
attended by more than 95% of the nominated representatives. Consensus statements 
were confirmed by nominal group technique and Delphi method.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Updated consensus statements regarding drug therapy, 
symptomatic and surgical management of JIA were compiled and judged strictly by 
the criteria of Evidence-Based Medicine (EBM).
