BACKGROUND: Ligand-targeted approaches have proven successful in improving the 
therapeutic index of a number of drugs. We hypothesized that the specific 
targeting of TNF-alpha antagonists to inflamed tissues could increase drug 
efficacy and reduce side effects.
RESULTS: Using uteroglobin (UG), a potent anti-inflammatory protein, as a 
scaffold, we prepared a bispecific tetravalent molecule consisting of the 
extracellular ligand-binding portion of the human TNF-alpha receptor P75 
(TNFRII) and the scFv L19. L19 binds to the ED-B containing fibronectin isoform 
(B-FN), which is expressed only during angiogenesis processes and during tissue 
remodeling. B-FN has also been demonstrated in the pannus in rheumatoid 
arthritis. L19-UG-TNFRII is a stable, soluble homodimeric protein that maintains 
the activities of both moieties: the immuno-reactivity of L19 and the capability 
of TNFRII to inhibit TNF-alpha. In vivo bio-distribution studies demonstrated 
that the molecule selectively accumulated on B-FN containing tissues, showing a 
very fast clearance from the blood but a very long residence time on B-FN 
containing tissues. Despite the very fast clearance from the blood, this fusion 
protein was able to significantly improve the severe symptomatology of arthritis 
in collagen antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA) mouse model.
CONCLUSIONS: The recombinant protein described here, able to selectively deliver 
the TNF-alpha antagonist TNFRII to inflamed tissues, could yield important 
contributions for the therapy of degenerative inflammatory diseases.
