Alkanna species are used in Iranian traditional medicine for treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases. This study was designed to 
evaluate the anti-inflammatory and anti-nociceptive effects of Alkanna frigida 
and Alkanna orientalis ethanolic extracts via the carrageenan-induced paw edema 
test and formalin test in rat and mouse, respectively. Ethanolic extracts of 
plant root were prepared and were injected intraperitoneally 60 min before 
carrageenan-induced inflammation or formalin-induced nociception at 100, 200 and 
400 mg/kg. Anti-inflammatory effects of plants were monitored for 3 h after 
carrageenan injection and anti-nociceptive effects were evaluated during the 
first hour after formalin injection. Diclofenac, a well-known anti-inflammatory 
and anti-nociceptive agent, was used as a positive control. Our results show 
that, in contrast to Alkanna orientalis, ethanolic extract of Alkanna frigida 
significantly decreases carrageenan-induced inflammation at 400 mg/kg, 
especially 3 h after inflammation induction. Both Alkanna frigida and Alkanna 
orientalis ethanolic extracts possess a remarkable anti-nociceptive effect at 
each dose (100, 200 and 400 mg/kg) in a dose-dependent manner during the first 
hour after formalin injection.The present findings provide more evidence for the 
potential anti-nociceptive effect of Alkanna sp. and the anti-inflammatory 
effect of Alkanna frigida. It supports their traditional indication in the 
treatment of pain and inflammatory-related diseases. These useful effects may 
result from the inhibitory interaction of the plant ethanolic extract with 
cyclooxygenase-2 enzyme and the subsequent reduction in prostaglandin 
production.
