OBJECTIVE: To identify novel genes associated with dysregulated proliferation of 
activated synovial fibroblasts, which are involved in arthritic joint 
destruction.
METHODS: We performed transcriptome analysis to identify genes that were 
up-regulated in the foot joints of mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). 
The effect of candidate genes on proliferation of synovial fibroblasts was 
screened using antisense oligodeoxynucleotides and small interfering RNAs 
(siRNAs). We characterized the expression and function of a novel gene, 
synoviocyte proliferation-associated in collagen-induced arthritis 1 
(SPACIA1)/serum amyloid A-like 1 (SAAL1) using antibodies and siRNA and 
established transgenic mice to examine the effect of SPACIA1/SAAL1 
overexpression in CIA.
RESULTS: Human and mouse SPACIA1/SAAL1 encoded 474 amino acid proteins that 
shared 80% homology. SPACIA1/SAAL1 was primarily expressed in the nucleus of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovial fibroblasts and was highly expressed in the 
hyperplastic lining of inflamed synovium. In addition, its expression level in 
RA- or osteoarthritis (OA)-affected synovial tissue was positively correlated 
with the thickness of the synovial lining. Furthermore, SPACIA1/SAAL1 siRNA 
inhibited the proliferation of synovial fibroblasts, especially tumor necrosis 
factor Î±-induced synovial fibroblasts, by blocking entry into the S phase 
without inducing apoptosis. Finally, transgenic mice overexpressing 
SPACIA1/SAAL1 exhibited early onset and rapid progression of CIA.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that SPACIA1/SAAL1 is necessary for abnormal 
proliferation of synovial fibroblasts and its overexpression is associated with 
the progression of synovitis in mice and humans. Thus, therapy targeting 
SPACIA1/SAAL1 might have potential as an inhibitor of synovial proliferation in 
RA and/or OA.
