OBJECTIVE: Synovial cells in rheumatoid synovium display abnormal proliferation, 
which leads to joint destruction. TRAIL has been described as a proapoptotic 
factor in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). This study was undertaken to 
investigate the functions of rAAV2/5-TRAIL in human FLS and in arthritic mice.
METHODS: Primary human FLS were infected with rAAV2/5-TRAIL in the presence or 
absence of epirubicin. Transgene expression was monitored by both enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay and flow cytometry. The disease-modulating activity of 
epirubicin plus rAAV2/5-TRAIL was investigated in mice with collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA).
RESULTS: Subtoxic doses of epirubicin potentiated rAAV2/5-mediated TRAIL 
expression in FLS and simultaneously enhanced the sensitivity of FLS to TRAIL. 
Epirubicin treatment up-regulated death receptor 4 (DR-4) and DR-5 expression 
and down-regulated FLIP expression, thereby enhancing the activation of 
procaspase 3, procaspase 8, and procaspase 9. An in vivo study showed that the 
combination of rAAV2/5-TRAIL gene therapy and epirubicin chemotherapy provided 
augmented antiarthritic effects in a mouse model of CIA. The intraarticular 
injection of rAAV2/5-TRAIL combined with epirubicin treatment significantly 
reduced the severity and incidence of CIA and joint swelling in the animals. 
Histologic evaluations revealed that inflammatory cell infiltration, cartilage 
destruction, and bone erosion were significantly reduced in the joints of the 
mice receiving the synthetic treatment. Results of a viral genome copy number 
assay indicated that epirubicin dramatically augmented the expression of 
rAAV2/5-TRAIL without altering its tissue distribution.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that epirubicin enhances the antiarthritic 
effect of rAAV2/5-TRAIL and that combination treatment might be an important 
therapeutic alternative, with practical significance for rheumatoid arthritis.
