Celecoxib (Cx) shows high efficacy in the treatment of osteoarthritis and 
rheumatoid arthritis as a result of its high specificity for COX-2, without 
gastrolesivity or interference with platelet function at therapeutic 
concentrations. Besides of anti-inflammatory effects, Cx also has a potential 
role for oral cancer chemoprevention. For these conditions, oral administration 
in long-term treatment is a concern due to its systemic side effects. However, 
local application at the site of injury (e.g., buccal inflammation conditions or 
chemoprevention of oral cancer) is a promising way to reduce its toxicity. In 
this study, the in vitro characterization of mucoadhesive chitosan (CHT) gels 
associated to AzoneÂ® was assessed to explore the potential buccal mucosal 
administration of Cx in this tissue. Rheological properties of gels were 
analyzed by a rheometer with cone-plate geometry. In vitro Cx release and 
permeability studies used artificial membranes and pig cheek mucosa, 
respectively. Mucoadhesion were measured with a universal test machine. CHT gels 
(3.0%) containing 2.0% or 3.0% Az showed more appropriate characteristics 
compared to the others: pH values, rheology, higher amount of Cx retained in the 
mucosa, and minimal permeation through mucosa, besides the highest mucoadhesion 
values, ideal for buccal application. Moreover, the flux (J) and amounts of drug 
released decreased with increased CHT and Az concentrations. CHT gels (3.0%) 
associated with 2.0% or 3.0% Az may be considered potential delivery systems for 
buccal administration of Cx.
