The study aimed to investigate the effect of the oral administration for 15 days 
of either Echinacea (E) or genuphil (a composite of chondroitin sulphate, 
glucosamine and methyl sulfonyl methane [GCM]) nutraceutical supplements on 
female rat model of acute or chronic arthritis induced by bacterial outer 
membrane protein (OMP) from faecal flora of healthy and rheumatic humans. 
Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP2), C-reactive protein (CRP) and 
rheumatoid factor (RF) values increased (p < 0.05) in both arthritic groups as 
compared to normal values. The rheumatic markers anti-CCP2, CRP and RF values 
decreased significantly in E- and GCM-treated groups compared to arthritic 
none-treated acute or chronic groups. The results of RF values of GCM-treated 
groups in acute and chronic models decreased exhibiting no statistical 
difference compared with the normal value. Histological examinations of the hind 
paw sections revealed moderate inflammation, oedema and mild proliferation of 
synovial cells in acute arthritic rats and more damage to cartilage and bone 
with severe inflammation in chronic ones. Echinacea acute treated group showed 
edema with proliferated synovial membrane and partial damage in cartilage and 
bone. While in the E-chronic treated group, rough edge with destructed cartilage 
and bone existed. However, the acute GCM group revealed mild cartilage damage. 
But the chronic GCM group showed mild synovial cells proliferation and revealed 
no inflammation with mild cartilage damage edge. Results demonstrated the OMP 
arthropathic property and through promising light on arthritis treatment using 
E- or GCM, with the advantage of GMC results over that of E-. The composite GCM 
is needed for further studies over the dose and duration to assess its 
preventive effects against the bacterial OMP arthrogenicity.
