Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in mice is an experimental model for rheumatoid 
arthritis, a human chronic inflammatory destructive disease. The therapeutic 
effect of neutralizing the cytokine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating 
factor (GM-CSF) by an antibody was examined in the mouse disease in a view of 
deriving a pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PKPD) model. In CIA mice the 
development of disease is measured by a total arthritic score (TAS) and an 
ankylosis score (AKS). We present a multi-response PKPD model which describes 
the time course of the unperturbed and perturbed TAS and AKS. The antibody acts 
directly on GM-CSF by binding to it. Therefore, a compartment for the cytokine 
GM-CSF is an essential component of the mathematical model. This compartment 
drives the disease development in the PKPD model. Different known properties of 
arthritis development in the CIA model are included in the PKPD model. Firstly, 
the inflammation, driven by GM-CSF, dominates at the beginning of the disease 
and decreases after some time. Secondly, a destructive (ankylosis) part evolves 
in the TAS that is delayed in time. In order to model these two properties a 
delay differential equation was used. The PKPD model was applied to different 
experiments with doses ranging from 0.1 to 100 mg/kg. The influence of the drug 
was modeled by a non-linear approach. The final mathematical model consists of 
three differential equations representing the compartments for GM-CSF, 
inflammation and destruction. Our mathematical model described well all 
available dosing schedules by a simultaneous fit. We also present an equivalent 
and easy reformulation as ordinary differential equation which grants the use of 
standard PKPD software.
