OBJECTIVE: The induction of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by active and passive 
immunization of mice results in the development of pain at the same time as the 
swelling and inflammation, with both peripheral and central sensitization 
contributing to joint pain. The purpose of this study was to examine the 
development of pain in the rat model of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and to 
evaluate the contribution of neuroimmune interactions to established arthritis 
pain.
METHODS: Mechanical hypersensitivity was assessed in female Lewis rats before 
and up to 18 days after induction of CIA by immunization with type II collagen. 
The effect of selective inhibitors of microglia were then evaluated by prolonged 
intrathecal delivery of a cathepsin S (CatS) inhibitor and a fractalkine (FKN) 
neutralizing antibody, from day 11 to day 18 following immunization.
RESULTS: Rats with CIA developed significant mechanical hypersensitivity, which 
started on day 9, before the onset of clinical signs of arthritis. Mechanical 
hypersensitivity peaked with the severity of the disease, when significant 
microglial and astrocytic responses, alongside T cell infiltration, were 
observed in the spinal cord. Intrathecal delivery of microglial inhibitors, a 
CatS inhibitor, or an FKN neutralizing antibody attenuated mechanical 
hypersensitivity and spinal microglial response in rats with CIA.
CONCLUSION: The inhibition of microglial targets by centrally penetrant CatS 
inhibitors and CX(3) CR1 receptor antagonists represents a potential therapeutic 
avenue for the treatment of pain in RA.
