OBJECTIVE: To provide an intermediate step between classic arthritis models and 
clinical trials, the rheumatoid arthritis (RA) synovium SCID mouse model is a 
valuable tool for use during preclinical research. We undertook this study to 
investigate the validity of this humanized mouse model using anti-tumor necrosis 
factor (anti-TNF) and anti-interleukin-1 (anti-IL-1) treatment and to 
investigate the direct effect of T cells- and B cell-related therapies on the 
transplanted RA synovial tissue.
METHODS: CB17/SCID mice were engrafted with human RA synovial tissue and 
systemically treated with anti-TNF, anti-IL-1, anti-IL-17, CTLA-4Ig, anti-CD20, 
or isotype control antibodies.
RESULTS: Validation of the model with anti-TNF treatment significantly reduced 
serum cytokine levels and decreased histologic inflammation, whereas anti-IL-1 
therapy did not show any effect on the RA synovial grafts. In mice engrafted 
with B cell-rich synovial tissue, anti-CD20 treatment showed clear therapeutic 
effects. Surprisingly, CTLA-4Ig treatment did not show any effects in this 
transplantation model, despite prescreening of the synovial tissue for the 
presence of CD3+ T cells and the costimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86. In 
contrast, great therapeutic potential was observed for anti-IL-17 treatment, but 
only when CD3+ T cells were abundantly present in the RA synovial tissue.
CONCLUSION: This human RA synovium SCID mouse model enabled us to show that 
CTLA-4Ig lacks direct effects on T cell activation processes in the synovial 
tissue. Further evidence was obtained that IL-17 might indeed be an interesting 
therapeutic target in RA patients with CD3-rich synovial tissue. Further 
characterization of the RA patients' individual synovial profiles is of great 
importance for achieving tailored therapy.
