Genetic mutation and pharmacological inhibition of Bruton's tyrosine kinase 
(Btk) both have been shown to prevent the development of collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) in mice, providing a rationale for the development of Btk 
inhibitors for treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In the present study, we 
characterized a novel Btk inhibitor, 
6-cyclopropyl-8-fluoro-2-(2-hydroxymethyl-3-{1-methyl-5-[5-(4-methyl-piperazin-1-yl)-pyridin-2-ylamino]-6-oxo-1,6-dihydro-pyridin-3-yl}-phenyl)-2H-isoquinolin-1-one 
(RN486), in vitro and in rodent models of immune hypersensitivity and arthritis. 
We demonstrated that RN486 not only potently and selectively inhibited the Btk 
enzyme, but also displayed functional activities in human cell-based assays in 
multiple cell types, blocking Fcε receptor cross-linking-induced degranulation 
in mast cells (IC(50) = 2.9 nM), Fcγ receptor engagement-mediated tumor necrosis 
factor α production in monocytes (IC(50) = 7.0 nM), and B cell antigen 
receptor-induced expression of an activation marker, CD69, in B cells in whole 
blood (IC(50) = 21.0 nM). RN486 displayed similar functional activities in 
rodent models, effectively preventing type I and type III hypersensitivity 
responses. More importantly, RN486 produced robust anti-inflammatory and 
bone-protective effects in mouse CIA and rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) 
models. In the AIA model, RN486 inhibited both joint and systemic inflammation 
either alone or in combination with methotrexate, reducing both paw swelling and 
inflammatory markers in the blood. Together, our findings not only demonstrate 
that Btk plays an essential and conserved role in regulating 
immunoreceptor-mediated immune responses in both humans and rodents, but also 
provide evidence and mechanistic insights to support the development of 
selective Btk inhibitors as small-molecule disease-modifying drugs for RA and 
potentially other autoimmune diseases.
