OBJECTIVES: Human six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of prostate 4 (STEAP4) is 
one of the STEAP family as a homologue of mouse tumour necrosis factor-Î±-induced 
adipose-related protein (TIARP). Recently, we reported that the TIARP gene 
expression was remarkably increased in spleen and joints of glucose-6-phosphate 
isomerise (GPI)-induced arthritis model, suggesting pivotal association to 
arthritis. The aim of the present study was to assess the expression, 
localisation and function of STEAP4 in peripheral blood of patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Peripheral blood was obtained from seven patients with RA, the surface 
expression of STEAP4 was detected by flow cytometry. The number of neutrophils 
was compared with the expression of STEAP4 mRNA derived from peripheral blood of 
patients with RA. Neutrophils were introduced by HL60 with retinoic acid, and 
were transfected with GFP-STEAP4 plasmid DNA, then the migration of 
neutrophil-like HL60 was determined by transwell assay. In addition, the 
fluctuation of STEAP4 mRNA was analysed before and after treatment with 
infliximab in 40 patients with RA.
RESULTS: STEAP4 was expressed on monocytes and neutrophils in peripheral blood 
in RA. The number of neutrophils and expression of STEAP4 mRNA was positively 
correlated. Migration of neutrophil-like HL60 was down-regulated by 
over-expression of STEAP4. Expression of STEAP4 Mrna was significantly decreased 
after infliximab treatment in patients with RA, especially in good responders.
CONCLUSIONS: STEAP4 is expressed on monocytes and neutrophils in peripheral 
blood, regulates cell migration, is down-regulated by TNF antagonist, and might 
be a possible predictor of response to TNF antagonist.
