INTRODUCTION: Little is known about the problems experienced by and the 
accommodation strategies used by computer users with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
or fibromyalgia (FM). This study (1) describes specific problems and 
accommodation strategies used by people with RA and FM during computer use; and 
(2) examines if there were significant differences in the problems and 
accommodation strategies between the different equipment items for each 
diagnosis.
METHODS: Subjects were recruited from the Arthritis Network Disease Registry. 
Respondents completed a self-report survey, the Computer Problems Survey. Data 
were analyzed descriptively (percentages; 95% confidence intervals). Differences 
in the number of problems and accommodation strategies were calculated using 
nonparametric tests (Friedman's test and Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test).
RESULTS: Eighty-four percent of respondents reported at least one problem with 
at least one equipment item (RA = 81.5%; FM = 88.9%), with most respondents 
reporting problems with their chair. Respondents most commonly used timing 
accommodation strategies to cope with mouse and keyboard problems, personal 
accommodation strategies to cope with chair problems and environmental 
accommodation strategies to cope with monitor problems.
CONCLUSIONS: The number of problems during computer use was substantial in our 
sample, and our respondents with RA and FM may not implement the most effective 
strategies to deal with their chair, keyboard, or mouse problems. This study 
suggests that workers with RA and FM might potentially benefit from education 
and interventions to assist with the development of accommodation strategies to 
reduce problems related to computer use.
