Fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) contribute significantly to the pathogenesis 
of Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Through introducing apoptosis inducer FasL to 
suppress the proliferation of arthritic FLSs may provide an efficient approach 
for treatment of RA. CTLA4-FasL, a fusion product integrating two inhibitory 
elements of CTLA4 (which can induce T cell anergy through blocking costimulatory 
signal) and FasL (which may upregulate Fas-mediated apoptosis in inflammatory 
synoviocytes) into one molecule, might be a desirable engineered derivative of 
soluble FasL which exerts severe side effects and poor activities. In present 
study, we investigated the possible effect of CTLA4-FasL protein on suppressing 
the proliferation of inflammatory FLSs and inflammation in experimental model of 
RA. The purified CTLA4-FasL protein exerted a significant 
proliferation-inhibition activity to activated arthritic FLSs through both 
unbounded free and membrane-anchorage manners. CTLA4-FasL gene delivery by 
recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vector in joint, provided more 
powerfully preventive effects than mature FasL on rat adjuvant-induced arthritis 
(AIA) as reflected in clinical signs and typically histological characters. 
Treatment with rAAV.CTLA4-FasL also significantly decreased the levels of key 
proinflammatory cytokines in AIA joints. Our observations indicate that 
CTLA4-FasL protein represents a significantly suppressive effect on inflammatory 
FLSs' proliferation and CTLA4-FasL gene transfer profoundly suppresses AIA, 
implicating potential application for treatment of RA by local joint delivery of 
CTLA4-FasL.
