IL-17 (interleukin-17), a hallmark cytokine of Th17 (T-helper 17) cells, plays 
critical roles in host defence against bacterial and fungal infections, as well 
as in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. The present review focuses on 
current knowledge of the regulation, functional mechanisms and targeting 
strategies of IL-17 in the context of inflammatory autoimmune diseases. Evidence 
shows that IL-17 is highly up-regulated at sites of inflammatory tissues of 
autoimmune diseases and amplifies the inflammation through synergy with other 
cytokines, such as TNF (tumour necrosis factor) α. Although IL-17 was originally 
thought to be produced mainly by Th17 cells, a newly defined T-cell subset with 
a specific differentiation programme and tight regulation, several other cell 
types (especially innate immune cells) are also found as important sources for 
IL-17 production. Although IL-17 activates common downstream signalling, 
including NF-κB (nuclear factor κB), MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinases), 
C/EBPs (CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins) and mRNA stability, the immediate 
receptor signalling has been shown to be quite unique and tightly regulated. 
Mouse genetic studies have demonstrated a critical role for IL-17 in the 
pathogenesis of variety of inflammatory autoimmune diseases, such as RA 
(rheumatoid arthritis) and MS (multiple sclerosis). Importantly, promising 
results have been shown in initial clinical trials of monoclonal antibodies 
against IL-17 or its receptor (IL-17R) to block IL-17-mediated function in 
treating autoimmune patients with psoriasis, RA and MS. Therefore targeting 
IL-17/IL-17R, IL-17-producing pathways or IL-17-mediated signalling pathways can 
be considered for future therapy in autoimmune diseases.
