T lymphocytes are key inflammatory cells contributing significantly to the 
pathogenesis of Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Biological treatments targeting T 
lymphocytes may provide an efficient approach for treatment of RA. CTLA4-FasL, a 
fusion product of extracellular domains of CTLA4 and FasL, integrating two 
inhibitory elements against T cells into one molecule, might be a desirable 
derivative of engineered soluble FasL or CTLA4 and have therapeutic potential in 
RA. The aim of this study was to investigate whether simultaneous induction of 
Fas-mediated apoptosis and blockade of co-stimulation signal by CTLA4-FasL gene 
delivery has a suppressive effect on adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) in Lewis 
rats. Recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vectors encoding rat CTLA4-FasL 
fusion gene (rAAV.CTLA4-FasL) or enhanced green fluorescent protein (rAAV.EGFP) 
were injected intraarticularly into both ankle joints after immunization. The 
ankles were monitored by measures of clinical, histological and inflammatory 
cytokines' changes. Treatment using rAAV.CTLA4-FasL resulted in a significant 
suppression of AIA compared with rAAV.EGFP control, as reflected in the mainly 
clinical signs including articular index, ankle joint thickness and paw swelling 
and typically histological characters of arthritic joints including synovial 
hyperplasia, inflammatory cells infiltration and cartilage degradation. 
Treatment with rAAV.CTLA4-FasL also significantly decreased the levels of key 
proinflammatory cytokines in AIA joints. Moreover, local productions of 
transgene mRNA and protein of CTLA4-FasL were found in injected joints without 
systemic distribution. Our results indicate that rAAV.CTLA4-FasL profoundly 
suppressed experimental model of RA, implicating the potential therapeutic 
applications for suppression of RA by local joint delivery of CTLA4-FasL.
