Inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis are often accompanied by 
higher plasma and synovial fluid levels of interleukin-1β (IL-1β), and by 
increased bone resorption. Since osteocytes are known to regulate bone 
resorption in response to changes in mechanical stimuli, we investigated whether 
IL-1β affects osteocyte-modulated osteoclastogenesis in the presence or absence 
of mechanical loading of osteocytes. MLO-Y4 osteocytes were pre-incubated with 
IL-1β (0.1-1 ng/ml) for 24h. Cells were either or not subjected to mechanical 
loading by 1h pulsating fluid flow (PFF; 0.7 ± 0.3 Pa, 5 Hz) in the presence of 
IL-1β (0.1-1 ng/ml). Conditioned medium was collected after 1h PFF or static 
cultures. Subsequently mouse bone marrow cells were seeded on top of the 
IL-1β-treated osteocytes to determine osteoclastogenesis. Conditioned medium 
from mechanically loaded or static IL-1β-treated osteocytes was added to 
co-cultures of untreated osteocytes and mouse bone marrow cells. Gene expression 
of cysteine-rich protein 61 (CYR61/CCN1), receptor activator of nuclear factor 
kappa-B ligand (RANKL), and osteoprotegerin (OPG) by osteocytes was determined 
immediately after PFF. Incubation of osteocytes with IL-1β, as well as 
conditioned medium from static IL-1β-treated osteocytes increased the formation 
of osteoclasts. However, conditioned medium from mechanically loaded 
IL-1β-treated osteocytes prevented osteoclast formation. Incubation with IL-1β 
upregulated RANKL and downregulated OPG gene expression by static osteocytes. 
PFF upregulated CYR61, RANKL, and OPG gene expression by osteocytes. Our results 
suggest that IL-1β increases osteocyte-modulated osteoclastogenesis, and that 
mechanical loading of osteocytes may abolish IL-1β-induced osteoclastogenesis.
