The recruitment of T lymphocytes during diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis is 
regulated by stimulation of the chemokine receptors expressed by these cells. 
This study was designed to assess the potential of a CXCR3-specific 
small-molecule agonist to inhibit the migration of activated human T cells 
toward multiple chemokines. Further experiments defined the molecular mechanism 
for this anti-inflammatory activity. Analysis in vitro demonstrated agonist 
induced internalization of both CXCR3 and other chemokine receptors coexpressed 
by CXCR3(+) T cells. Unlike chemokine receptor-specific antagonists, the CXCR3 
agonist inhibited migration of activated T cells toward the chemokine mixture in 
synovial fluid from patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. A humanized mouse 
air-pouch model showed that intravenous treatment with the CXCR3 agonist 
prevented inflammatory migration of activated human T cells toward this synovial 
fluid. A potential mechanism for this action was defined by demonstration that 
the CXCR3 agonist induces receptor cross-phosphorylation within CXCR3-CCR5 
heterodimers on the surface of activated T cells. This study shows that 
generalized chemokine receptor desensitization can be induced by specific 
stimulation of a single chemokine receptor on the surface of activated human T 
cells. A humanized mouse model was used to demonstrate that this receptor 
desensitization inhibits the inflammatory response that is normally produced by 
the chemokines present in synovial fluid from patients with active rheumatoid 
arthritis.
