OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of p21-activated kinase 1 (PAK1) in 
regulating migration, invasion and MMP expression in RA fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (FLS).
METHODS: RA FLS migration and invasion in vitro were measured by the Boyden 
chamber method. Invasion of RA FLS into cartilage was detected in the severe 
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse co-implantation model of RA in vivo. PAK1 
and MT1-MMP expression were examined by western blotting. ELISA was used to 
measure the production and activity of MMPs.
RESULTS: Phosphorylated PAK1 (p-PAK1) protein expression was increased in ex 
vivo synovial membrane cells from RA patients. Stimulation with IL-1β or TNF-α 
up-regulated p-PAK1 expression. Inhibition of PAK1 by transfection with dominant 
negative PAK1 mutant (dnPAK1) reduced in vitro migration and invasion of RA FLS. 
In the SCID mouse model, RA FLS invasion into cartilage was attenuated by 
transfection with dnPAK1 in vivo. PAK1 regulated IL-1β-induced production and 
activity of MMP-13 and MT1-MMP. Inhibition of MMP-13 or MT1-MMP activity also 
reduced RA FLS invasion. Furthermore, dnPAK1 transfection inhibited c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation, but did not affect the activities of 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases and p38. Inhibition of the JNK activity 
by chemical inhibitor significantly reduced the migration, invasion and 
production of MMP-13 and MT1-MMP.
CONCLUSION: PAK1 plays an important role in regulating the migration, invasion 
and production and activity of MMPs in RA FLS, which is mediated by the JNK 
pathway. This suggests a novel strategy targeting PAK1 to prevent joint 
destruction of RA.
