We have previously reported an increase in interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-17 levels, 
and a continuous activation of caspase-1 in early rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
patients. These results suggest that drugs targeting IL-1β regulatory pathways, 
in addition to tumor necrosis factor (TNF), may constitute promising therapeutic 
agents in early RA. We have recently used a THP-1 macrophage-like cell line to 
screen 2320 compounds for those that down-regulate both IL-1β and TNF secretion. 
Celastrol was one of the most promising therapeutic candidates identified in 
that study. Our main goal in the present work was to investigate whether 
administration of celastrol is able to attenuate inflammation in a rat model of 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA). Moreover, since IL-1β is known to play a role 
in the polarization of Th17 cells, we also investigate whether administration of 
digoxin, a specific inhibitor of Th17 cells polarization, is able to attenuate 
inflammation in the same rat model. We found that celastrol administration 
significantly suppressed joint inflammation. The histological and 
immunohistochemical evaluation revealed that celastrol-treated rats had a normal 
joint structure with complete abrogation of the inflammatory infiltrate and 
cellular proliferation. In contrast, we observed that digoxin administration 
significantly ameliorated inflammation but only if administrated in the early 
phase of disease course (after 4days of disease induction), and it was not 
efficient at inhibiting the infiltration of immune cells within the joint and in 
preventing damage. Thus, our results suggest that celastrol has significant 
anti-inflammatory and anti-proliferative properties and can constitute a 
potential anti-inflammatory drug with therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of 
immune-mediated inflammatory diseases such as RA. Furthermore, we find that 
early inhibition of Th17 cells polarization ameliorates arthritis but it is not 
as effective as celastrol.
