Inter alpha inhibitor (IαI) is an abundant serum protein consisting of three 
polypeptides: two heavy chains (HC1 and HC2) and bikunin, a broad-specificity 
Kunitz-type proteinase inhibitor. The complex is covalently held together by 
chondroitin sulfate but during inflammation IαI may interact with TNF-stimulated 
gene 6 protein (TSG-6), which supports transesterification of heavy chains to 
hyaluronan. Recently, IαI was shown to inhibit mouse complement in vivo and to 
protect from complement-mediated lung injury but the mechanism of such activity 
was not elucidated. Using human serum depleted from IαI, we found that IαI is 
not an essential human complement inhibitor as was reported for mice and that 
such serum has unaltered hemolytic activity. However, purified human IαI 
inhibited classical, lectin and alternative complement pathways in vitro when 
added in excess to human serum. The inhibitory activity was dependent on heavy 
chains but not bikunin and detected at the level of initiating molecules (MBL, 
properdin) in the lectin/alternative pathways or C4b in the classical pathway. 
Furthermore, IαI affected formation and assembly of the C1 complex and prevented 
assembly of the classical pathway C3-convertase. Presence and putative 
interactions with TSG-6 did not affect the ability of IαI to inhibit complement 
thus implicating IαI as a potentially important complement inhibitor once 
enriched onto hyaluronan moieties in the course of local inflammatory processes. 
In support of this, we found a correlation between IαI/HC-containing proteins 
and hemolytic activity of synovial fluid from patients suffering from rheumatoid 
arthritis.
