INTRODUCTION: Statins (hydroxymethylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitors) 
are effective in reducing the risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in 
patients with hyperlipidemia, hypertension, or type II diabetes. Next to their 
cholesterol-lowering activity, statins have immunomodulatory properties. Based 
on these properties, we hypothesized that statin use may eventually lead to 
dysregulation of immune responses, possibly resulting in autoimmunity. We have 
recently shown in an observational study that statin use was associated with an 
increased risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis. Our objective was to 
investigate whether a causal relationship could be established for this finding.
METHODS: The mouse collagen type II (CII)-induced arthritis (CIA) model was 
used, with immunization, challenge, and euthanasia at days 0, 21, and 42, 
respectively. Statins were given orally before (day -28 until day 21) or after 
(day 21 until day 42) CIA induction. Atorvastatin (0.2 mg/day) or pravastatin 
(0.8 mg/day) was administered. Arthritis was recorded three times a week. Serum 
anti-CII autoantibodies and cytokines in supernatants from 
Concanavalin-A-stimulated lymph node cells and CII-stimulated spleen cells were 
measured.
RESULTS: Statin administration accelerated arthritis onset and resulted in 100% 
arthritic animals, whereas only seven out of 12 nonstatin control animals 
developed arthritis. Atorvastatin administration after CIA induction resulted in 
earlier onset than atorvastatin administration before induction, or than 
pravastatin administration before or after induction. The arthritic score of 
animals given pravastatin before CIA induction was similar to that of the 
nonstatin controls, whereas the other groups that received statins showed higher 
arthritic scores. Atorvastatin administration, especially before CIA induction, 
increased anti-CII autoantibody production. IL-2 and IL-17 production by lymph 
node and spleen cells was higher in CIA animals than in PBS controls, but was 
not affected by statin administration. While IFNÎ³ production was not affected by 
CIA induction, atorvastatin administration before CIA induction increased the 
production of this cytokine.
CONCLUSION: These data support previous results from our observational studies, 
indicating a role for statins in the induction of autoimmunity.
