Molecular, cellular, and genetic interventions are now feasible for autoimmune 
hepatitis because of improved understanding of pathogenic mechanisms, advances 
in recombinant technology, and previous successes in animal models and humans 
with other immune-mediated inflammatory diseases. Non-mitogenic monoclonal 
antibodies to CD3 promote apoptosis of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, inhibit 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, improve the function of regulatory T 
cells, and induce a durable remission in mouse models and humans with autoimmune 
diabetes. Monoclonal antibodies to CD20 deplete B lymphocytes, modify 
antibody-dependent and cell-mediated cytotoxic pathways, enhance regulatory T 
cell function, and improve isolated cases of autoimmune hepatitis with B-cell 
disorders. Recombinant cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 fused with 
immunoglobulin can block the second co-stimulatory signal required for 
lymphocyte activation, and it has been licensed for use in rheumatoid arthritis 
but not tried in autoimmune hepatitis. Other considerations on the distant 
horizon are monoclonal antibodies against inhibitory receptors on regulatory T 
cells, adoptive transfer of fresh regulatory T cells, tailored glycolipids that 
strengthen the immunosuppressive activity of natural killer T cells, small 
inhibitory ribonucleic acid molecules that silence promoter genes supporting 
disease activity, and mesenchymal stem cell transplantation to re-constitute 
immune homeostasis and support the damaged liver. Development of these feasible 
new interventions for autoimmune hepatitis requires therapeutic animal models, 
societal support, and a collaborative network of investigators to conduct 
rigorous clinical trials.
