INTRODUCTION: Citrullinated self-proteins are thought to be involved in the 
onset/progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Numerous studies have been 
performed to look for the self-antigen that becomes citrullinated and induces 
RA. Importantly, these studies have been performed using citrullinated 
self-antigens injected into an animal model in the presence of a strong adjuvant 
in order to derive the response. However, to date no studies have been performed 
to determine if these phenotypes can be induced in the absence of an adjuvant.
METHODS: To investigate this possibility, mice were immunized with citrullinated 
or non-citrullinated mouse Type II collagen (Cit-Col or Col) in the presence or 
absence of Freund's Complete Adjuvant (FCA).
RESULTS: An autoimmune-like RA response was observed in mice immunized with 
Cit-Col in the absence of FCA; by the increase in caliper score, visual 
observation, and micro-CT analysis of bone erosions. Antibody and T-cell 
responses were increased in the Cit-Col injected mice to Cit-Col as well as 
antibody to Anti-Citrullinated Peptide Antigens (ACPA) as determined by a 
commercially available test kit.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, the use of citrullinated mouse collagen induces an 
autoimmune-like RA in the absence of an adjuvant. These data also suggest that 
citrullinate self-proteins may be potential molecular adjuvants that assist in 
driving an inflammatory response, that increases the production of PAD in joint 
tissue, resulting in the citrullination of other self-proteins to exacerbate the 
disease.
