INTRODUCTION: Endothelial dysfunction (ED) participates to atherogenesis 
associated to rheumatoid arthritis. We recently reported increased arginase 
activity/expression in vessels from adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rats. In 
the present study, we investigated the effects of a curative treatment with the 
arginase inhibitor Nw-hydroxy-nor-L-arginine (nor-NOHA) on vascular dysfunction 
in AIA rats.
METHODS: AIA rats were treated with nor-NOHA (40 mg/kg/d, ip) for 21 days after 
the onset of arthritis. A group of untreated AIA rats and a group of healthy 
rats served as controls. ED was assessed by the vasodilatory effect of 
acetylcholine (Ach) on aortic rings. The role of superoxide anions, prostanoids, 
endothelium-derived hyperpolarizing factor (EDHF) and nitric oxide synthase 
(NOS) pathway was studied. Plasma levels of IL-6 and vascular endothelial growth 
factor (VEGF) were determined by ELISA kits. Arthritis severity was estimated by 
a clinical, radiological and histological analysis.
RESULTS: Nor-NOHA treatment fully restored the aortic response to Ach to that of 
healthy controls. The results showed that this beneficial effect is mediated by 
an increase in NOS activity and EDHF and reduced superoxide anion production as 
well as a decrease in the activity of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, thromboxane and 
prostacyclins synthases. In addition, nor-NOHA decreased IL-6 and VEGF plasma 
levels in AIA rats. By contrast, the treatment did not modify arthritis severity 
in AIA rats.
CONCLUSIONS: The treatment with an arginase inhibitor has a potent effect on ED 
in AIA independently of the severity of the disease. Our results suggest that 
this new pharmacological approach has the potential as a novel add-on therapy in 
the treatment of RA.
