Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory disorder that is characterized by 
persistent recurrence of joint inflammation leading to cartilage and bone 
destruction. The present anti-arthritis therapies failed to achieve satisfactory 
remission in all patients; therefore, it is still necessary to develop novel 
approaches to fulfill the demand in clinic. Here, we reported the therapeutic 
effects of lactosyl derivative Gu-4, a synthetic compound that was previously 
identified as a selective inhibitor against leukocyte integrin CD11b, in a 
bovine type II collagen induced arthritis (CIA) rat model. First, prophylactic 
administration of Gu-4 (1.2728 mg/kg) to rats by intraperitoneal injection every 
2 days from the first day of collagen immunization significantly decreased the 
incidence of CIA, diminished the mean paw volume increase, and reduced the 
number of swollen paws. Second, administration of Gu-4 (1.2728 mg/kg) to rats at 
early-onset stage of CIA prevented the progression of the pathological process 
of RA, accelerated the remission of paw edema, and declined the arthritis score; 
after 5 weeks treatment, X-ray and histological examinations were carried out, 
the ankle joint of hind limb of Gu-4 treated CIA rats exhibited slighter bone 
erosion and much less inflammatory cell infiltration compared to those of saline 
treated animals; furthermore, Gu-4 remarkably attenuated the production of 
rheumatoid factor (RF) in the serum of CIA rats as determined by ELISA. 
Moreover, we performed in vitro lymphocyte proliferation assay and found that 
Gu-4 significantly inhibited the proliferation of splenic lymphocytes isolated 
from CIA rats in a dose-dependent manner. Our results suggest that Gu-4 can 
effectively ameliorate CIA and might be an alternative option for the treatment 
of RA.
