OBJECTIVES: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have a reduced life 
expectancy due to increased cardiovascular disease. The lack of a suitable 
animal model resembling both RA and atherosclerosis has hindered studies 
demonstrating a direct link between systemic inflammation in RA and the 
development of atherosclerosis. Our objective was to overcome this barrier by 
generating an animal model (K/BxA(g7)) that spontaneously develops both RA-like 
disease and atherosclerosis.
METHODS: Arthritis severity was evaluated using clinical indices and 
immunohistochemical staining of ankle joint specimens. Aortic atherosclerosis 
was delineated via Sudan IV staining and immunohistochemical analysis. Serum 
cholesterol and lipoprotein levels were measured using enzymatic assays. Serum 
levels of cytokines, chemokines and adipokines were determined by Luminex 
assays.
RESULTS: K/BxA(g7) mice developed a destructive arthropathy followed by 
prominent aortic atherosclerosis. These animals also displayed dyslipidaemia, 
characterised by reduced serum levels of total cholesterol and high-density 
lipoprotein, and increased low-density lipoprotein (LDL)/vLDL compared with 
control mice. Further, there were higher levels of circulating inflammatory 
mediators, such as interleukin-6, sRANKL and CCL5 in atherosclerotic K/BxA(g7) 
mice compared with controls. Treatment with etanercept reduced arthritis and 
atherosclerosis development in K/BxA(g7) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: K/BxA(g7) mice recapitulate the same sequence of events occurring 
in patients with RA, namely an erosive, inflammatory arthritis followed by 
atherosclerosis. These data suggest that the K/BxA(g7) mouse is a novel system 
for investigating the interplay between systemic inflammation occurring in RA 
and the development of atherosclerosis.
