Recent evidence indicates that the antimalarial agent artesunate (ART) has 
immunomodulatory properties that may be useful for treating rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). However, the effects of ART on the RA animal model have not been 
described. The current study aimed to evaluate the antiarthritic effect of ART 
and explore the potential mechanism on type II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
in rats. From the day of arthritis onset, rats were treated daily by gavage with 
leflunomide (Lef) or ART at a dosage of 10 mg/kg/d or 5 mg/kg/d, respectively, 
for 16 days. The severity of arthritis and levels of pro- and anti-inflammatory 
cytokines in site were measured. The expression and activity of 
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 were determined. The activation of nuclear 
factor kappa B and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways was 
investigated in rats with CIA and in Raw264.7 cells. Our results showed that ART 
treatment significantly attenuated inflammation symptoms and prevented cartilage 
and bone destruction. ART decreased expression of the proinflammatory cytokines 
interleukin-1β, tumor necrosis factor-α, and interleukin-17α. Both expression 
and activity of MMP-9 were efficiently inhibited by ART. ART significantly 
inhibited the degradation of IκB and activation of extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase and c-Jun N-terminal kinase in rats with CIA and in 
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated Raw264.7 cells. The present study demonstrated 
that ART ameliorated rat CIA. The antiarthritic effect might be achieved by 
inhibiting the action of proinflammatory cytokines and the activity of MMP-9 via 
suppression of nuclear factor kappa B and mitogen-activated protein kinase 
signaling pathway. These results show that ART may be used as an adjuvant 
therapy for patients with RA.
