This study is investigating the role of leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) in the 
development of inflammation and joint damage in the mouse K/B×N serum transfer 
arthritis model. LIF knock-out (LIF(-/-)) mice were generated by mating 
heterozygote females (LIF(+/-)) with heterozygote males. Arthritis was induced 
in 8-20-week-old LIF knock-out mice (LIF(-/-)) by intraperitoneal injection of 
pooled K/B×N sera (50 µl) on days 0 and 2. Clinical disease was scored daily for 
6 days. Safranin-O and haematoxylin-stained sections were scored for synovitis, 
joint space exudate, cartilage degradation and bone damage. RNA was extracted 
from ankle joints and used to investigate gene expression levels of tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1, LIF, LIF receptor, oncostatin M 
(OSM), OSM receptor, IL-6 and their common receptor subunit gp130 by 
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The 
results show that wild-type mice developed severe clinically overt 
polyarthritis. In contrast, LIF(-/-) mice showed a more than 50% reduction in 
clinical arthritis severity. Significantly lower histological scores were 
observed in LIF(-/-) mice compared to wild-type disease controls. LIF(-/-) mice 
had histopathological scores that were similar to normal healthy mice. IL-6 
subfamily cytokine and receptor subunit expression remained unchanged. The 
expression levels for IL-6 were reduced significantly in all the diseased mice, 
whether wild-type or LIF(-/-) mice (P < 0·001), compared to healthy wild-type 
mice. We conclude that LIF contributes to the development of disease in the 
K/B×N serum transfer model of arthritis. These results provide further evidence 
for the role of LIF in inflammation and cartilage bone resorption and provide 
impetus to test the effects of LIF blockade as a therapeutic strategy in 
rheumatoid arthritis.

© 2012 The Authors. Clinical and Experimental Immunology © 2012 British Society 
for Immunology.
