OBJECTIVE: Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a mosquito-borne alphavirus that causes 
a chronic debilitating polyarthralgia/polyarthritis, for which current 
treatments are often inadequate. To assess whether new drugs being developed for 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) might find utility in the treatment of alphaviral 
arthritides, we sought to determine whether the inflammatory gene expression 
signature of CHIKV arthritis shows any similarities with RA or collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of RA.
METHODS: Using a recently developed animal model of CHIKV arthritis in adult 
wild-type mice, we generated a consensus CHIKV arthritis gene expression 
signature, which was used to interrogate publicly available microarray studies 
of RA and CIA. Pathway analyses were then performed using the overlapping gene 
signatures.
RESULTS: Gene set enrichment analysis showed that there was a highly significant 
overlap in the differentially expressed genes in the CHIKV arthritis model and 
in RA. This concordance also increased with the severity of RA, as measured by 
the inflammation score. A highly significant overlap was also seen between CHIKV 
arthritis and CIA. Pathway analysis revealed that the overlap between these 
arthritides was spread over a range of different inflammatory processes. 
Involvement of T cells and interferon-γ (IFNγ) in CHIKV arthritis was confirmed 
in studies of MHCII-deficient mice and IFNγ-deficient mice, respectively.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that RA, a chronic autoimmune arthritis, and 
CHIKV disease, usually a self-limiting viral arthropathy, share multiple 
inflammatory processes. New drugs and biologic therapies being developed for RA 
may thus find application in the treatment of alphaviral arthritides.
