Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease characterized by chronic 
inflammation of the synovial joints, deformities, and disability. The prolonged 
use of conventional anti-inflammatory drugs is associated with severe adverse 
effects. Therefore, there is an urgent need for safer and less expensive 
therapeutic products. Celastrol is a bioactive component of Celastrus, a 
traditional Chinese medicine, and it possesses anti-arthritic activity. However, 
the mechanism of action of Celastrol remains to be fully defined. In this study 
based on the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA) model of RA, we examined the 
effect of Celastrol on two of the key mediators of arthritic inflammation, 
namely chemokines and their receptors, and related pro-inflammatory cytokines. 
We treated arthritic Lewis rats with Celastrol (200μg/rat) or its vehicle by 
daily intraperitoneal (ip) injection beginning at the onset of AA. At the peak 
phase of AA, the sera, the draining lymph node cells, spleen adherent cells, and 
synovial-infiltrating cells of these rats were harvested and tested. 
Celastrol-treated rats showed a significant reduction in the levels of 
chemokines (RANTES, MCP-1, MIP-1α, and GRO/KC) as well as cytokines (TNF-α and 
IL-1β) that induce them, compared to the vehicle-treated rats. However, 
Celastrol did not have much effect on cellular expression of chemokine receptors 
except for an increase in CCR1. Further, Celastrol inhibited the migration of 
spleen adherent cells in vitro. Thus, Celastrol-induced suppression of various 
chemokines that mediate cellular infiltration into the joints might contribute 
to its anti-arthritic activity. Our results suggest that Celastrol might offer a 
promising alternative/adjunct treatment for RA.
