Lyme arthritis, caused by Borrelia burgdorferi, has similarities to rheumatoid 
arthritis and its experimental murine model, collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). 
Currently, no common strain exists for examination of arthritis models of Lyme 
arthritis and CIA, which are typically studied in C3H/HeJ and DBA/1 mice, 
respectively. The aim of this study was to define the characteristics of 
Borrelia burgdorferi infection and arthritis in the DBA/1 murine strain. Murine 
Lyme arthritis was induced in C3H/HeJ and DBA/1 mice by subcutaneous infection 
with B. burgdorferi. Tibiotarsal joints were measured during infection, and mice 
were sacrificed for histologic, microbiologic, and serologic analysis on days 14 
and 42 postinfection. All bladder cultures obtained from C3H/HeJ and DBA/1 mice 
at 14 days postinfection grew Borrelia. There was no significant difference in 
spirochetal burdens in hearts and tibiotarsal joints at days 14 and 42 
postinfection. Tibiotarsal joint swelling and histologic scoring were not 
significantly different between the two strains. Serologic analysis revealed 
increased IgG2a production in C3H/HeJ mice compared to DBA/1 mice. Analysis of 
2-dimensional immunoblots revealed several specific antigens (LA7, BBA03, BBA64, 
BBA73, OspA, and VlsE) which were not recognized by DBA/1 sera. We conclude that 
the DBA/1 murine strain is a suitable model for the study of Lyme arthritis and 
experimental B. burgdorferi infection, allowing direct comparison between Lyme 
arthritis and collagen-induced arthritis. The specificity of the humoral immune 
response differs between the two strains, further study of which may reveal 
important findings about how individual strains respond to B. burgdorferi 
infection.
