BACKGROUND: Endogenous Granulocyte Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor (GMCSF) 
is released in rheumatoid arthritis patients, who are largely protected from 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Introducing exogenous GMCSF into an AD mouse model 
reduced amyloid deposition by 55% and restored normal cognition. No published 
studies have examined exogenous GMCSF and cognitive functioning in humans. 
OBJECTIVES/DESIGN: The goal of the current study was to examine the association 
between receipt of GMCSF and cognitive functioning in patients receiving colony 
stimulating factors as part of routine supportive care for hematopoietic cell 
transplantation (HCT). SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: Archived neuropsychological 
data were examined from a longitudinal study of cognitive functioning in 95 
patients receiving HCT at the Moffitt Cancer Center. INTERVENTION: Receipt of 
GMCSF and/or Granulocyte Colony Stimulating Factor (GCSF) was ascertained 
through patient billing records. MEASUREMENTS: Patients were assessed with a 
battery of neuropsychological tests prior to transplant and 6 and 12 months 
post-transplant. RESULTS: Patients treated with GMCSF and GCSF (n=19) showed 
significantly greater improvement in total neuropsychological functioning (TNP) 
at 6 months than patients treated with GCSF only (n=76) (p=.04). There was no 
group difference in TNP at 12 months (p=.24). Improvement in TNP from baseline 
to 6 months post-HCT was significant in the GMCSF+GCSF group (p=.01) but not the 
GCSF only group (p=.33). Improvement in TNP from baseline to 12 months post-HCT 
was significant in both groups (ps<.01). CONCLUSION: Preliminary data from this 
study of humans receiving colony stimulating factors suggest that receipt of 
GMCSF+GCSF was associated with greater cognitive improvement than GCSF alone. 
Randomized controlled trials of the effects of GMCSF on cognitive functioning in 
humans are warranted and underway to confirm these findings.
