INTRODUCTION: Cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) is a major 
non-collagenous component of cartilage. Earlier, we developed a new mouse model 
for rheumatoid arthritis using COMP. This study was undertaken to investigate 
the epitope specificity and immunopathogenicity of COMP-specific monoclonal 
antibodies (mAbs).
METHODS: B cell immunodominant regions on the COMP molecule were measured with a 
novel enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using mammalian expressed full-length 
mouse COMP as well as a panel of recombinant mouse COMP fragments. 18 mAbs 
specific to COMP were generated and the pathogenicity of mAbs was investigated 
by passive transfer experiments.
RESULTS: B cell immunodominant epitopes were localized within 4 antigenic 
domains of the COMP but with preferential response to the epidermal growth 
factor (EGF)-like domain. Some of our anti-COMP mAbs showed interactions with 
the native form of COMP, which is present in cartilage and synovium. Passive 
transfer of COMP-specific mAbs enhanced arthritis when co-administrated with a 
sub-arthritogenic dose of a mAb specific to collagen type II. Interestingly, we 
found that a combination of 5 COMP mAbs was capable of inducing arthritis in 
naive mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified the specificities of mAbs to COMP and their 
contribution to the development of arthritis. These findings will further 
improve our understanding of the autoantibody mediated immunopathologies 
occurring widely in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), as well as in other autoimmune 
disorders.
