Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are characterized by their potent immuno-regulatory 
activity, however our previous data have shown that MSC have no therapeutic 
effects on collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). To further clarify the complexity, 
the effects of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) on the in vitro and in vivo 
immunoregulatory activity of MSC were investigated in this study, as TNF-α is 
recognized as the key factor in the development of rheumatoid arthritis. The 
nuclear translocation of the inflammation-associated factor NF-κB was observed 
after human umbilical cord MSC were treated with TNF-α and the cell 
proliferation status was assessed by MTT test. The inhibitory effects of MSC or 
TNF-α-treated MSC on the mixed lymphocyte reaction, in which Wistar rat spleen 
mononuclear cells were served as the responders and the splenocytes from SD rat 
spleens as the stimulators, were also determined by the MTT test. Further, the 
therapeutic potentials of MSC or TNF-α-treated MSC were observed in a Wistar rat 
CIA model. The results showed that NF-κB translocated into the nuclei promptly 
after TNF-α treatment, though TNF-α had little effect on the MSC proliferation. 
MSC, whether pre-stimulated by TNF-α or not and when different doses were 
tested, exhibited obviously inhibitory effects on the proliferation of the 
lymphocytes (P < 0.001 for all groups tested), while MSC-treated by TNF-α 
displayed more potent suppression especially when low-density were used. 
Unexpectedly, the infiltration of inflammatory cells into the involved knees was 
aggravated by cell treatment and the pathological scores were significantly 
higher than those of controls (P < 0.05). It is concluded that the TNF-α 
exhibits different effects on immune regulation activity of MSC, and its 
underlying mechanism needs to further investigate.
