This study compared the efficacy and skin permeability of nine topical 
preparations of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (ketoprofen, 
diclofenac, flurbiprofen, and piroxicam patches; and ketoprofen, diclofenac, 
piroxicam, niflumic acid, and ibuprofen gels) available in the European Union. 
The anti-inflammatory effect of these NSAID preparations was evaluated in rat 
models of acute inflammation (carrageenan or yeast treatment) and chronic 
inflammation (collagen or adjuvant treatment). Skin permeability of the 
preparations was evaluated in vitro using mouse skin. In rats with acute 
inflammation, both ketoprofen preparations significantly inhibited 
carrageenan-induced edema and yeast-induced hyperalgesia. Flurbiprofen and 
diclofenac preparations also showed a significant anti-inflammatory effect, but 
the ketoprofen products were the most potent among the four patch preparations 
and five gel preparations. With repeated application, the ketoprofen patch 
significantly decreased edema from day 3 in collagen-treated rats, while other 
preparations (ketoprofen gel, diclofenac patch, and diclofenac gel) decreased 
edema from day 7. In rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis, only the ketoprofen 
patch significantly decreased edema after 2 weeks of application. In the skin 
permeation study, the ketoprofen preparations showed higher skin permeability 
compared with the other NSAID preparations. These results suggested that 
ketoprofen preparations had the most potent anti-inflammatory and analgesic 
activity related to good skin permeability. Efficacy of the ketoprofen patch was 
comparable to or better than that of ketoprofen gel at a lower dose and 
frequency of administration. Ketoprofen products, especially the patch 
preparation, could be useful for treating inflammatory pain in diseases like 
osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
