BACKGROUND: Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, a cytokine that is highly 
therapeutic to rheumatoid arthritis and several other inflammatory diseases, 
exhibits rapid blood clearance and poor retention time on the target in clinical 
application due to its small size and lack of specificity to target tissue. 
Albumin has been widely employed as macromolecular carrier for drug delivery 
purpose to extend the plasma half-life of therapeutic molecules and has been 
shown to selectively accumulate and to be metabolized in the inflamed joints of 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. This suggests that genetic fusion of IL-1ra 
to albumin can probably overcome the drawbacks of in vivo application of IL-1ra.
RESULT: A recombinant protein, engineered by fusing human serum albumin (HSA) to 
the carboxyl terminal of IL-1ra, was produced in Pichia pastoris and purified to 
homogeneity. The fusion protein retained the antagonist activity of IL-1ra and 
had a plasma half-life of approximately 30-fold more than that of IL-1ra in 
healthy mice. In vivo bio-distribution studies demonstrated that the fusion 
protein selectively accumulated in arthritic paws for a long period of time in 
mice with collagen-induced arthritis, showing low uptake rates in normal organs 
such as liver, kidney, spleen and lung in contrast to IL-1ra alone. Moreover, 
this fusion protein was able to significantly improve the therapeutic efficacy 
of IL-1ra in collagen-induced arthritis mouse model.
CONCLUSIONS: The fusion protein described here, able to selectively deliver 
IL-1ra to inflamed tissue, could yield important contributions for the therapy 
of rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory diseases.
