We have identified and characterized a novel proangiogenic glycoprotein (NAP) 
with molecular weight of 67 kDa from synovial fluid of rheumatoid arthritis 
patients. Proteomic analysis of the protein revealed 29% sequence coverage with 
maximum identity for human retinoblastoma binding protein 2. N-terminal amino 
acid sequence showed no identity to recently discovered protein sequences. NAP 
was also identified in both normal and tumor cell lines by Western blotting. NAP 
is a permeability factor as verified by miles permeability assay. The 
proangiogenic potential of NAP was identified using shell less CAM, rat cornea 
and tumor on CAM assays. NAP induces expression of VEGF and Flt-1 gene as 
verified by promoter reporter gene analysis. Further NAP induces proliferation 
of endothelial cells and formation of tube like structures. NAP is also involved 
in migration and invasion of tumor cells. Clinical data revealed the presence of 
NAP in breast cancer biopsies. We have developed monoclonal antibody (mAb), and 
specific ELISA, which confirmed the presence of NAP in the cytosol of tumor 
cells. The mAb effect was evaluated with established angiogenic assays. Further, 
we investigated the detailed mechanism by which NAP induces angiogenesis. NAP is 
phosphorylated by VEGF induced activation of MAPK and JNK pathways through 
VEGFR2 phosphorylation. NAP involves JNK pathway predominantly with further 
activation of NFÎºB in downstream processing of VEGF activation. Together these 
findings establish that NAP displays angiogenic properties and promotes 
efficient neovascularization both in vitro and in vivo models. These 
observations suggest that anti-NAP-mAb can be targeted for antiangiogenic 
therapy of cancer.
