OBJECTIVES: Pregnancy leads to rheumatoid arthritis remission in humans. The 
objective of this study was to determine if the SKG mouse could serve as a model 
for pregnancy-associated inflammatory arthritis amelioration. In addition, the 
maternal peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) transcriptome was assessed to 
define a biomarker associated with remission. METHODS: Cohorts of 
zymosan-treated pregnant SKG mice and controls were monitored for arthritis 
progression. Microarray analysis evaluated alterations in gene expression in 
maternal PBMCs at embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) between arthritic and 
pregnancy-remitted mice. A selected target, serum amyloid A3 (SAA3), was further 
investigated using quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) and an 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). RESULTS: Pregnancy resulted in 
complete or partial remission in the majority of the zymosan-treated SKG mice. 
Twenty-seven transcripts were differentially expressed in the PBMCs between 
arthritic and pregnancy-remitted mice. Expression and plasma SAA3 levels 
decreased with pregnancy-induced arthritis amelioration and plasma SAA3 levels 
correlated with arthritis severity. CONCLUSIONS: These results establish the SKG 
mouse as a model system to study pregnancy-induced amelioration of arthritis. 
These studies also establish SAA3 as a biomarker of arthritis amelioration in 
SKG mice. This model can be used to elucidate the molecular and cellular 
mechanisms underlying the impact of pregnancy on the maternal immune system that 
results in arthritis amelioration.
