AIM: To investigate whether increased levels of vimentin citrullinated peptides 
identified by MS in articular cartilage can be measured in pathologies other 
than rheumatoid arthritis and be utilised for diagnostic purposes.
METHODS: A monoclonal antibody against the sequence RLRSSVPGV-citrulline (VICM) 
was developed and evaluated in a carbon tetrachloride (CCl(4)) (n=52 + 28 
controls) rat model of liver fibrosis and two clinical cohorts of adult patients 
with hepatitis C (HCV) (n=92) and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 
(n=62), and compared to healthy controls.
RESULTS: In CCl(4)-treated rats, mean systemic VICM levels increased 31% at week 
12 (176 ng/mL, P<0.001), 41.7% at weeks 16 (190 ng/mL, P<0.001), 49.2% at weeks 
20 (200 ng/ml, P<0.001), compared to controls (134 ng/mL). VICM levels 
correlated with total hepatic collagen determined by Sirius red staining of rat 
livers (r=0.75, P<0.05). In the HCV cohort, when stratified according to the 
METAVIR F score, VICM levels were 63% higher in F0 (632 ng/mL ±75, p<0.05), 54% 
in F1 (597 ng/mL ±41.3, p<0.05) and 62% in F2 (628 ng/mL ±59, p<0.05) all 
compared to controls. In the NAFLD cohort, VICM levels were 20.6% higher in F0 
(339 ±12 ng/mL, P<0.05), 23.8% in F1 (348 ±12 ng/mL, P<0.05) and 28.8% in F2 
(362 ±25 P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated increased serological levels of citrullinated and 
MMP degraded vimentin in an animal model of liver fibrosis and in early fibrosis 
associated with HCV and NAFLD patients. These data suggest that citrullinated 
and MMP degraded proteins are also present in liver fibrosis.
