TNF-α-blocking agents such as infliximab, adalimumab and etanercept are widely 
used for the treatment of severe inflammatory diseases including rheumatoid 
arthritis and psoriasis. The currently used TNF-α blockers have Fc regions of 
the human IgG1 subtype, which is advantageous in terms of in vivo half-life but 
also raise the potential for unwanted effector-mediated effects, such as 
antibody dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) or complement-dependent 
cytotoxicity (CDC). To address this issue, we constructed a novel hybrid protein 
by fusing the TNF receptor (TNFR) with a hybrid Fc (hyFc) consisting of the CH2 
and CH3 regions of IgG4 and the highly flexible hinge regions of IgD which would 
not have ADCC and CDC activity. The resulting fusion protein, TNFR-hyFc, was 
over-expressed in CHO and pharmacological characteristics were evaluated in 
comparison with the structurally similar etanercept. TNFR-hyFc effectively 
neutralized TNF-α in L929 bioassay and showed a 1.5-fold higher neutralizing 
activity compared to etanercept. In a pharmacokinetic study in cynomolgus 
monkeys, TNFR-hyFc showed plasma half-life and AUC comparable to etanercept. In 
a mouse collagen induced arthritis model, TNFR-hyFc showed significant 
amelioration of arthritis compared to etanercept or vehicle control. In an 
LPS-induced septic shock model, TNFR-hyFc showed a similar level of protection 
against mortality as etanercept. These results confirm the feasibility of the 
TNFR-hyFc as an effective TNF-α blocker for the treatment of inflammatory 
diseases.

Copyright © 2012 The International Alliance for Biological Standardization. 
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
