Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a potent bioactive lipid, is emerging as a 
central mediator in inflammation and immune responses. We have previously 
implicated S1P and its synthetic enzyme sphingosine kinase (SK) in inflammatory 
and autoimmune disorders, including inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid 
arthritis. Generation of S1P requires phosphorylation of sphingosine by SK, of 
which there are two isoforms. Numerous studies have implicated SK1 in immune 
cell trafficking, inflammation and autoimmune disorders. In this study, we set 
out to determine the role of SK and S1P in lupus nephritis (LN). To this end, we 
examined S1P and dihydro-S1P (dh-S1P) levels in serum and kidney tissues from a 
mouse model of LN. Interestingly dh-S1P was significantly elevated in serum and 
kidney tissue from LN mice, which is more readily phosphorylated by SK2. 
Therefore, we employed the use of the specific SK2 inhibitor, ABC294640 in our 
murine model of LN. Treatment with ABC294640 did not improve vascular or 
interstitial pathology associated with LN. However, mice treated with the SK2 
inhibitor did demonstrate decreases in glomerular pathology and accumulation of 
B and T cells in the spleen these were not statistically different from lpr mice 
treated with vehicle. LN mice treated with ABC294640 did not have improved urine 
thromboxane levels or urine proteinuria measurements. Both S1P and dh-S1P levels 
in circulation were significantly reduced with ABC294640 treatment; however, 
dh-S1P was actually elevated in kidneys from LN mice treated with ABC294640. 
Together these data demonstrate a role for SKs in LN; however, they suggest that 
inhibition of SK1 or perhaps both SK isoforms would better prevent elevations in 
S1P and dh-S1P and potentially better protect against LN.
