BACKGROUND: Due to recent studies indicating that the deregulation of microRNAs 
(miRNAs) in T cells contributes to increased severity of rheumatoid arthritis, 
we hypothesized that deregulated miRNAs may interact with key mRNA targets 
controlling the function or differentiation of these cells in this disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To test our hypothesis, we used microarrays to 
survey, for the first time, the expression of all known mouse miRNAs in parallel 
with genome-wide mRNAs in thymocytes and naïve and activated peripheral CD3(+) T 
cells from two mouse strains the DBA-1/J strain (MHC-H2q), which is susceptible 
to collagen induced arthritis (CIA), and the DBA-2/J strain (MHC-H2d), which is 
resistant. Hierarchical clustering of data showed the several T cell miRNAs and 
mRNAs differentially expressed between the mouse strains in different stages of 
immunization with collagen. Bayesian statistics using the GenMir(++) algorithm 
allowed reconstruction of post-transcriptional miRNA-mRNA interaction networks 
for target prediction. We revealed the participation of miR-500, miR-202-3p and 
miR-30b*, which established interactions with at least one of the following 
mRNAs: Rorc, Fas, Fasl, Il-10 and Foxo3. Among the interactions that were 
validated by calculating the minimal free-energy of base pairing between the 
miRNA and the 3'UTR of the mRNA target and luciferase assay, we highlight the 
interaction of miR-30b*-Rorc mRNA because the mRNA encodes a protein implicated 
in pro-inflammatory Th17 cell differentiation (Rorγt). FACS analysis revealed 
that Rorγt protein levels and Th17 cell counts were comparatively reduced in the 
DBA-2/J strain.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This result showed that the miRNAs and mRNAs 
identified in this study represent new candidates regulating T cell function and 
controlling susceptibility and resistance to CIA.
