Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic inflammatory disease with cardiovascular 
complications as the leading cause of morbidity. Carvedilol is an adrenergic 
antagonist which has been safely used in treatment of several cardiovascular 
disorders. Given that carvedilol has powerful antioxidant/anti-inflammatory 
properties, we aimed to investigate its protective potential against arthritis 
that may add further benefits for its clinical usefulness especially in RA 
patients with concomitant cardiovascular disorders. Two models were studied in 
the same rat; adjuvant arthritis and subcutaneous air pouch edema. Carvedilol 
(10mg/kg/day p.o. for 21days) effectively suppressed inflammation in both models 
with comparable efficacy to the standard anti-inflammatory diclofenac 
(5mg/kg/day p.o.). Notably, carvedilol inhibited paw edema and abrogated the 
leukocyte invasion to air pouch exudates. The latter observation was confirmed 
by the histopathological assessment of the pouch lining that revealed mitigation 
of immuno-inflammatory cell influx. Carvedilol reduced/normalized oxidative 
stress markers (lipid peroxides, nitric oxide and protein thiols) and lowered 
the release of inflammatory cytokines (TNF-Î± & IL-6), and eicosanoids (PGE2 & 
LTB4) in sera and exudates of arthritic rats. Interestingly, carvedilol, per se, 
didn't present any effect on assessed biochemical parameters in normal rats. 
Together, the current study highlights evidences for the promising 
anti-arthritic effects of carvedilol that could be mediated through attenuation 
of leukocyte migration, alleviation of oxidative stress and suppression of 
proinflammatory cytokines and eicosanoids.
