The most rigorous scenario for testing a candidate rheumatoid arthritis 
therapeutic would be to use clinically relevant biomarkers and readouts to 
monitor disease development in an animal model that has a mechanism of disease 
that reflects the human condition. Treatment should begin when the full spectrum 
of arthritic processes, including bone damage, is present. We have tried to take 
this approach to evaluate a novel EP4 receptor antagonist (ER-886046) for its 
anti-arthritic potential. This work aimed not only to test a potential drug, but 
to also demonstrate a strategy for performing a more clinically relevant 
evaluation of future candidate arthritis treatments. A variety of biomarkers 
including: radiographic evaluation, clinical scoring, histology analysis, F4/80 
macrophage immunohistochemistry, luminol bioluminescent imaging and 
(99m)Tc-MDP-SPECT imaging were evaluated as disease readouts in the mouse 
anti-collagen antibody induced arthritis model (CAIA). CAIA mice were treated 
either prophylactically or therapeutically with ER-886046 and the compound's 
efficacy was probed using the various biomarkers and compared to the reference 
drugs prednisolone and celecoxib. The various biomarkers effectively measured 
different aspects of arthritis pathology and consistently demonstrated the 
efficacy of ER-886046. The compound was found to be effective even when dosed 
therapeutically after bone damaging processes had initiated. The results 
presented herein demonstrate how biomarkers and a clinically relevant 
experimental design can be used to evaluate a candidate therapeutic. Utilization 
of clinically relevant biomarkers may provide a means for more translatable 
pre-clinical testing of candidate therapeutics and may provide information on 
their mechanism of action.
