Adjuvant induced arthritis is a chronic crippling, skeleton-muscular disorder 
having nearest approximation to human rheumatoid arthritis for which there is 
currently no medicine available effecting a permanent cure. Even modern drugs 
used for the amelioration of the symptoms, offer only temporary relief and also 
produce severe side effects. In the indigenous system of medicine, wood of 
Premna serratifolia Linn., is reported to be useful in the treatment of 
arthritis. It is a large shrub, distributed throughout Asia, used against a wide 
variety of diseases. However, no systematic study has been reported regarding 
its anti-arthritic activity. This work was aimed at the scientific validation of 
the ethno-pharmacological claim about its anti-arthritic property. In the 
present study, anti-arthritic activity of ethanol extract of Premna serratifolia 
Linn., wood is done by Freund's adjuvant induced arthritis model. Loss in body 
weight during arthritis condition was corrected on treatment with ethanol 
extract and standard drug, indomethacin. Biochemical parameters such as 
hemoglobin content, total WBC, RBC, erythrocyte and sedimentation rate were also 
estimated. The ethanol extract at the dose of 300 mg/kg body weight inhibited 
the rat paw edema by 68.32% which is comparable with standard drug indomethacin 
74.87% inhibition of rat paw edema after 21 days. The results of the current 
investigation concluded, ethanol extract of Premna serratifolia Linn., wood 
possess a significant anti-arthritic activity against adjuvant induced arthritis 
and justifying its therapeutic role in arthritic condition. The observed 
anti-arthritic activity may be due to the presence of phytoconstituents such as 
irridiod glycosides, alkaloids, phenolic compounds and flavonoids.
