Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a critical angiogenic factor 
affecting endothelial cells, inflammatory cells and neuronal cells. In addition 
to its well-defined positive role in wound healing, pathological roles for VEGF 
have been described in cancer and inflammatory diseases (i.e. atherosclerosis, 
rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease and osteoarthritis). Recently, 
we showed that transcription factors LITAF and STAT6B affected the inflammatory 
response. This study builds upon our previous results in testing the role of 
mouse LITAF and STAT6B in the regulation of VEGF-mediated processes. Cells 
cotransfected with a series of VEGF promoter deletions along with truncated 
forms of mLITAF and/or mSTAT6B identified a DNA binding site (between -338 and 
-305 upstream of the transcription site) important in LITAF and/or 
STAT6B-mediated transcriptional regulation of VEGF. LITAF and STAT6B 
corresponding protein sites were identified. In addition, siRNA-mediated 
knockdown of mLITAF and/or mSTAT6B leads to significant reduction in VEGF mRNA 
levels and inhibits LPS-induced VEGF secretion in mouse RAW 264.7 cells. 
Furthermore, VEGF treatment of mouse macrophage or endothelial cells induces 
LITAF/STAT6B nuclear translocation and cell migration. To translate these 
observations in vivo, VEGF164-soaked matrigel were implanted in whole-body 
LITAF-deficient animals (TamLITAF(-/-) ), wild-type mice silenced for STAT6B, 
and in respective control animals. Vessel formation was found significantly 
reduced in TamLITAF(-/-) as well as in STAT6B-silenced wild-type animals 
compared with control animals. The present data demonstrate that VEGF regulation 
by LITAF and/or STAT6B is important in angiogenesis signalling pathways and may 
be a useful target in the treatment of VEGF diseases.

Â© 2013 The Authors. Published by Foundation for Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
