We develop an information-theoretic method for gene-gene (GGI) and 
gene-environmental interactions (GEI) analysis of syndromes, defined as a 
phenotype vector comprising multiple quantitative traits (QTs). The K-way 
interaction information (KWII), an information-theoretic metric, was derived for 
multivariate normal distributed phenotype vectors. The utility of the method was 
challenged with three simulated data sets, the Genetic Association Workshop-15 
(GAW15) rheumatoid arthritis data set, a high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and 
atherosclerosis data set from a mouse QT locus study, and the 1000 Genomes data. 
The dependence of the KWII on effect size, minor allele frequency, linkage 
disequilibrium, population stratification/admixture, as well as the power and 
computational time requirements of the novel method was systematically assessed 
in simulation studies. In these studies, phenotype vectors containing two and 
three constituent multivariate normally distributed QTs were used and the KWII 
was found to be effective at detecting GEI associated with the phenotype. High 
KWII values were observed for variables and variable combinations associated 
with the syndrome phenotype compared with uninformative variables not associated 
with the phenotype. The KWII values for the phenotype-associated combinations 
increased monotonically with increasing effect size values. The KWII also 
exhibited utility in simulations with non-linear dependence between the 
constituent QTs. Analysis of the HDL and atherosclerosis data set indicated that 
the simultaneous analysis of both phenotypes identified interactions not 
detected in the analysis of the individual traits. The information-theoretic 
approach may be useful for non-parametric analysis of GGI and GEI of complex 
syndromes.
