Previous studies have revealed the significance of cytokine interleukin 1 (IL-1) 
in the onset and progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The precise molecular 
mechanisms related to IL-1 underlying RA is still elusive. We conducted a whole 
genome-wide transcriptomal comparison of wild-type (WT) and arthritis-prone IL-1 
receptor antagonist (IL-1rn) deficient BALB/c mice to address this issue. To 
refine our search efforts, gene expression profiling was also performed on 
paired wild-type and arthritis-resistant IL-1rn deficient DBA/1 mice as internal 
controls when identifying causative arthritis candidate genes. Two hundred and 
fifteen transcripts were found to be dysregulated greater than or equal to 
2-fold in the diseased mice. The altered transcriptome in BALB/c mice revealed 
increased myeloid cell activities and impaired lymphocyte functionality, 
suggesting dual regulatory effects of IL-1 hyperactivity on immunological 
changes associated with arthritis development. Phase-specific gene expression 
changes were identified, such as early increase and late decrease of heat shock 
protein coding genes. Moreover, common gene expression changes were also 
observed, especially the upregulation of paired Ig-like receptor A (Pira) in 
both early and late phases of arthritis. Real-time PCR was performed to validate 
the expression of Pira and an intervention experiment with a major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I inhibitor (brefeldin A) was carried out 
to investigate the role of suppressing Pira activity. We conclude that global 
pattern changes of common and distinct gene expressions may represent novel 
opportunities for better control of RA through early diagnosis and development 
of alternative therapeutic strategies.
