Sirolimus is an immunosupressive drug that specifically inhibit the activation 
of T-lymphocytes. This study was undertaken to investigate whether treatment 
with sirolimus exert analgesic effect in rat adjuvant-induced arthritis, an 
animal model of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis was induced by a single 
subcutaneous injection of Freund's complete adjuvant to male Wistar rats that 
were divided into four groups; control (saline), vehicle (ethanol), sirolimus 
0.75 and sirolimus 1.5. Sirolimus (0.75 and 1.5mg/kg/day) was administered 
intraperitoneally using Monday-Wednesday-Friday dosing schedule for 29 days, 
this dosing regimen revealed acceptable trough blood concentrations in arthritic 
rats. Adjuvant inoculation resulted in paw inflammation, hyperalgesia and 
allodynia as assessed by pletismometer, analgesymeter and dynamic plantar 
aesthesiometer respectively. Light microscopic evaluation of the arthritic 
metacarpophalangeal joints revealed synovial hypertrophy with inflammatory 
cellular infiltration, cartilage destruction and partial subchondral bone 
resorption. ELISA tests of serum TNF-α, IL-1β or IL-6 did not show any change in 
arthritic rats, while Western blotting analysis revealed a significant increase 
in TNF-α (P<0.001), but not IL-1β or IL-6, protein expression in the lumbar 
spinal cord of arthritic rats. Treatment with sirolimus significantly decreased 
the arthritic lesions (P<0.001) and paw swelling (P<0.05), alleviated the 
histological features in the metacarpophalangeal joint, resulted in 
antihyperalgesic and antiallodynic effects without affecting the locomotor 
activity and prevented the increased spinal cord TNF-α level (P<0.05). It seems 
that prevention of the increased TNF-α expression in the spinal cord may 
partially contribute to the antihyperalgesic effect of sirolimus in adjuvant 
arthritic rats and sirolimus could be a promising immunosupressive agent in the 
treatment of arthritic pain.
