BACKGROUND: In the postgenome era, G-protein-coupled receptor families have been 
recognized as significant drug targets in medicinal chemistry. A specific 
chemokine receptor, CXCR4, has multiple critical functions in normal 
physiologies including embryonic development of the cardiovascular, hemopoietic 
and central nervous systems, and underlies problematic pathologies such as HIV 
infection, cancer metastasis, leukemia progression and rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A tetradecamer peptide, T140, derived from the horseshoe 
crab, and its biologically stable derivative, 4F-benzoyl-TN14003, were found to 
be powerful CXCR4 antagonists that block HIV entry to cells. These peptides have 
also shown remarkable inhibitory activity against cancer metastasis and 
progression in a variety of cancers. Slow release administration of 
4F-benzoyl-TN14003, for example, was found to significantly reduce pulmonary 
metastasis of breast cancer cells in severe combined immunodeficient mice. This 
peptide also shows inhibitory effects against melanoma metastasis and 
Epstein-Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferation in mice, suppresses the 
delayed-type hypersensitivity response induced by sheep red blood cells and 
reduced collagen-induced arthritis in both mouse models of arthritis.
CONCLUSION: T140 analogues have the potential to become promising agents for 
chemotherapy of AIDS, cancer and rheumatoid arthritis. This review summarizes 
the development of low molecular weight CXCR4 antagonists based on pharmacophore 
identification in T140 analogues and also provides an opinion on the future of 
the development of CXCR4 antagonists.
