Treatment of patients suffering from chronic diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis with recombinant antibodies is time consuming and fairly expensive and 
can be associated with side effects due to generalized depletion of the target 
molecule. We have addressed these issues by developing an alternative approach 
consisting of the intraarticular injection of a DNA vector encoding for the 
anti-C5 neutralizing recombinant miniantibody MB12/22. This method allows local 
production of the antibody in sufficient amount to be effective in preventing 
joint inflammation in a rat model of antigen-induced arthritis. Injection of the 
DNA vector in a right knee of normal rats resulted in the production of the 
minibody detected in the synovial washes by western blot with a strong signal 
peaking at 3 days after administration. DNA encoding for the minibody was shown 
for 14 days in the synovial tissue and was undetectable in the controlateral 
knee and in other organs. The preventive effect of this approach was evaluated 
in rats receiving a single injection of the vector 3 days before the induction 
of antigen-induced arthritis and analyzed 3 days later. The treated rats 
exhibited a lower increase in swelling, associated with a lower number of PMN in 
the articular washes and reduced deposition of C9 in synovial tissue compared to 
control rats. These results suggest that treating the inflamed joints with a 
vector that induces a local production of a neutralizing anti-C5 antibody may 
represent a useful strategy to inhibit in situ complement activation and to 
treat patients with monoarthritis. Moreover, this approach may be adopted as a 
novel therapeutic strategy to prevent monoarthritis as an alternative to local 
treatment with antibodies commonly used in this form of arthritis, with the 
advantages of the lower cost and the longer persistence of antibody production.
