Recently, phosphatidylserine (PS) has received attention for its 
anti-inflammatory effect; however, the molecular mechanisms of its action have 
not been fully understood. Thus, we hypothesized that PS might have 
antiarthritic and anti-inflammatory effects. To test this hypothesis, the in 
vitro anti-inflammatory effect of soybean-derived PS was tested on interleukin 
(IL)-1β-stimulated fibroblast-like synoviocytes from rheumatoid arthritis 
patients (RA-FLS) by measuring the levels of IL-6, IL-8, prostaglandin E(2), and 
vascular endothelial growth factor by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The 
analgesic and antiarthritic activities of PS were investigated in rat models of 
carrageenan-induced acute paw pain and arthritis. The former was evaluated with 
a paw pressure test; the latter, by measuring paw volume and weight distribution 
ratio. In addition, the participation of mitogen-activated protein kinase 
signaling in the anti-inflammatory and antiarthritic effects of PS was 
investigated in RA-FLS. Phosphatidylserine inhibited the production of 
inflammatory mediators IL-6; IL-8; vascular endothelial growth factor; and, in 
particular, prostaglandin E(2) in IL-1β-stimulated RA-FLS. These effects were 
associated with abrogation of inhibitor of nuclear factor-κBα phosphorylation 
and suppression of p38 and c-jun amino terminal kinase but not extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase 1/2 phosphorylation. In rats, PS also showed a 
significant inhibitory effect on arthritic and nociceptive symptoms induced by 
carrageenan. These findings suggest that PS has anti-inflammatory and 
antiarthritic effects in vitro and in in vivo animal models; thus, PS should be 
further studied to determine its potential use as either a pharmaceutical or 
dietary supplement for alleviating arthritic symptoms.
