Rheumatoid cachexia is associated with rheumatoid arthritis and it increases 
mortality and morbidity. Adjuvant-induced arthritis is an experimental model of 
rheumatoid arthritis that causes anorexia and muscle wasting. 
α-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) has anti-inflammatory actions, and it 
is able to decrease inflammation in several inflammatory diseases including 
experimental arthritis. In this study we tested whether systemic α-MSH treatment 
is able to ameliorate cachexia in arthritic rats. On day 8 after adjuvant 
injection control and arthritic rats were treated with α-MSH (50 μg/rat ip) 
twice a day, until day 16 when all rats were euthanized. Arthritis decreased 
food intake, but it increased hypothalamic expression of neuropeptide Y (NPY) 
and Agouti-related peptides (AgRP) as well as interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) mRNA. In arthritic rats, α-MSH decreased the external 
signs of arthritis and increased food intake (P < 0.01). In addition, α-MSH 
decreased hypothalamic expression of IL-1β, COX-2, proopiomelanocortin, and 
prohormone-converting (PC) enzymes PC1/3 and PC2 mRNA in arthritic rats. In 
control rats, α-MSH did not modify food intake or hypothalamic expression of 
aforementioned mRNA. α-MSH prevented arthritis-induced increase in gastrocnemius 
COX-2, muscle-specific RING-finger protein-1 (MuRF1), and atrogin-1 expression, 
and it increased fast myofiber size. In conclusion our data show that in 
arthritic rats peripheral α-MSH treatment has an anti-cachectic action 
increasing food intake and decreasing muscle wasting.
