We demonstrate herein a novel time-resolved fluoroimmunoassay (TRFIA) with high 
sensitivity and wide range for quantitative detection of ANA-Ig(GAM) antibodies 
using a biotin-avidin amplification system. The immunoassay was conducted by 
following procedures for a typical sandwich immunoreactions with cell nucleus 
form Hela and the Eu(3+)-labeled biotin combined with biotinylated mouse 
anti-human Ig(GAM) served as the solid nuclear antigen for ANA and the tracer, 
respectively. The sensitivity, specificity, and stability of the kit were 
evaluated and comparison with the classical enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) kit was also made. The average intra-assay and interassay CVs detected 
by the established ANA-Ig(GAM) biotin-avidin-TRFIA were 4.21% and 6.34%, 
respectively. The lower detection limit was 2.24 U/mL, and the mean recovery 
rate was 100.74%. The good measurable range of the established 
biotin-avidin-TRFIA was within 1.95-64,000 U/mL, while it was only within 
32.5-4000 U/mL using an ELISA kit. The values determined by the 
biotin-avidin-TRFIA and ELISA correlated well (R2 = 0.989). The positive rate of 
healthy volunteers and patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), Sj√∂gren's syndrome 
(SS), scleroderma, and mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) was 0, 100%, 
18.5%, 100%, 37.9%, 90.9%, and 92%, respectively. We conclude that the 
biotin-avidin-TRFIA we developed gives promise for greater sensitivity and 
accurate detection for ANA-Ig(GAM) in diagnosing and monitoring autoimmune 
disorders.
