Periodontal disease affects about 80% of adults in America, and is characterized 
by oral bacterial infection-induced gingival inflammation, oral bone resorption, 
and tooth loss. Periodontitis is also associated with other diseases such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, and heart disease. Although many efforts have 
been made to develop effective therapies for this disease, none have been very 
effective and there is still an urgent need for better treatments and 
preventative strategies. Herein we explored for the first time the possibility 
that adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated RNAi knockdown could be used to treat 
periodontal disease with improved efficacy. For this purpose, we used 
AAV-mediated RNAi knockdown of Atp6i/TIRC7 gene expression to target bone 
resorption and gingival inflammation simultaneously. Mice were infected with the 
oral pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis W50 (P. gingivalis) in the maxillary 
periodontium to induce periodontitis. We found that Atp6i depletion impaired 
extracellular acidification and osteoclast-mediated bone resorption. 
Furthermore, local injection of AAV-shRNA-Atp6i/TIRC7 into the periodontal 
tissues in vivo protected mice from P. gingivalis infection-stimulated bone 
resorption by >85% and decreased the T-cell number in periodontal tissues. 
Notably, AAV-mediated Atp6i/TIRC7 knockdown also reduced the expression of 
osteoclast marker genes and inflammation-induced cytokine genes. Atp6i(+/-) mice 
with haploinsufficiency were similarly protected from P. gingivalis 
infection-stimulated bone loss and gingival inflammation. This suggests that 
AAV-shRNA-Atp6i/TIRC7 therapeutic treatment may significantly improve the health 
of millions who suffer from P. gingivalis-mediated periodontal disease.
