The P70-84 peptide (also called 5/4E8 epitope) of the human cartilage 
proteoglycan (PG) aggrecan is the dominant/arthritogenic epitope in both humans 
and arthritis-prone BALB/c mice (PG-induced arthritis, PGIA). An elevated T cell 
reactivity was demonstrated to a citrullinated version of the P70-84 epitope in 
most of the patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The goal of this study was 
to understand better how a T cell epitope, if citrullinated, may affect 
antigenicity/arthritogenicity in PGIA, a murine model of RA. T cell reactivity 
to differentially citrullinated versions of either the human PG aggrecan P70-84 
peptide or the corresponding mouse sequence was assessed in peptide or 
aggrecan-immunized and arthritic BALB/c mice as well as in T cell receptor 
transgenic mice specific for peptide P70-84 sequence. Peripheral T cell 
responses were induced by priming BALB/c mice with either the human wild-type or 
its citrullinated versions. Unexpectedly, priming with the citrullinated 
self-peptide induced a higher T cell response compared to the wild-type sequence 
(p<0.001), and the citrullination of the human peptide abolished T cell 
reactivity in PGIA. Our data suggest that T cells reactive to the citrullinated 
P70-84 peptide escaped thymic selection and are present in the peripheral T cell 
repertoire. Results of this study provide evidence that citrullination of an 
immunodominant T cell epitope may substantially alter, either increase or 
abolish, T cell recognition at the periphery in an experimental model of 
arthritis.
