BACKGROUND: Propolis is a resinous substance collected by honeybees from leaf 
buds and cracks in the bark of various plants. We previously demonstrated the 
inhibitory activity of Brazilian propolis ethanolic extract against the 
differentiation process of Th17 cells and pathogenesis of collagen-induced 
arthritis, which is an experimental animal model of rheumatoid arthritis. Th1 
cells are also involved in several autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, such as 
inflammatory bowel disease. In the present study, we demonstrated for the first 
time that Brazilian propolis significantly inhibited the generation of Th1 
cells. Furthermore, we hypothesized that the administration of propolis to a 
murine model of colitis would suppress Th1 cell differentiation and ultimately 
ameliorate colitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CD4 T cells were stimulated under Th1-polarizing 
conditions (immobilized anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 antibodies with IL-12 plus an 
anti-IL-4 monoclonal antibody for 5days) with or without the propolis ethanolic 
extract. Cells were characterized for helper T cell subsets by flow cytometric 
analysis. Furthermore, we investigated the effects of propolis on 
2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced colitis in a mouse model.
RESULTS: Propolis dose-dependently reduced the frequency of IFNÎ³-producing CD4 T 
cells under Th1-polarizing conditions. Furthermore, the inhibitory effect of 
propolis on Th1 differentiation was demonstrated in vivo. The severity of 
colitis in mice fed propolis was significantly lower than that of mice fed the 
control diet.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the suppressive effect of Brazilian 
propolis on Th1 differentiation may be useful in controlling unbalanced cytokine 
networks in autoimmune diseases.
