AIMS: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is associated with high cardiovascular 
mortality. Impaired endothelial cell (EC) function and elevated angiotensin II 
levels may be central to the link between vascular dysfunction and RA. Here we 
investigated the action of angiotensin type 1 receptor (AT1R) blockade on 
endothelium-dependent relaxation of the isolated saphenous artery in a rat model 
of monoarthritis.
MAIN METHODS: Adjuvant arthritis was induced in rats with and without 
prophylactic losartan (AT1R antagonist) treatment. Vehicle-treated rats were 
used as controls. Wire myography was employed to investigate EC function of 
isolated rings of saphenous artery.
KEY FINDINGS: EC-dependent relaxation in arteries from non-inflamed control rats 
was mediated by both nitric oxide (NO) and endothelium-derived hyperpolarising 
factor (EDHF) with the EDHF response dependent principally on functional 
myoendothelial gap junctions. While NO-dependent relaxation remained unaffected, 
the EDHF-mediated response was abolished in arteries from arthritic rats 
(P<0.001), however, substantial protection (approximately 50%) of the 
EDHF-relaxation was found in arthritic rats treated with losartan (P<0.01). 
Thus, the attenuated EDHF response found in the saphenous artery of arthritic 
rats was significantly reversed by AT1R blockade.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest a key role for the angiotensin system in the 
EC dysfunction found in chronic joint inflammation and highlights AT1R as a 
potential therapeutic target to redress the vascular impairment and mortality 
associated with RA.
