Glucocorticoids have long been recognized to have beneficial effects in 
rheumatoid arthritis and asthma. Numerous clinical trials show the efficacy of 
short term low dose treatment to resolve inflammation. Despite the success of 
short term use, there is concern regarding chronic use of glucocorticoids 
because of the development of exogenous Cushings syndrome. Chronic variable 
stress models have detailed the effects of chronic stress exposure on body 
weight, plasma corticosteroid levels, ACTH levels, and adrenal weights, but 
limited studies detail the effects of the body systems induced by continuous 
exposure to glucocorticoids similar to that seen in exogenous Cushings 
syndrome. The present study uses a TCPL drug delivery system to administer 
corticosterone (CS) continuously in male and female animals for 24 days and 
evaluates long term chronic use effects on body weight, adrenal weight, and 
adrenal ultrastructure. Continuous release of CS resulted in slight decreases in 
body weight in both male and female rats and decreases in adrenal wet weight in 
the female rats. Ultrastructural changes were seen in the adrenal histology in 
both female and male rats. Male rat adrenal glands showed atrophy of the zona 
glomerulosa and hypertrophy of the adrenal medulla. Female rats showed 
disorganization of all zones within the adrenal gland and an increase in fat 
around the gland. The information is important for understanding physiological 
differences in males and females during stress. The continuous release of CS may 
provide insight into the pathology of exogenous Cushings syndrome.
