Cia4 is a locus on rat chromosome 7 that regulates disease severity and joint 
damage in models of rheumatoid arthritis, including pristane-induced arthritis 
(PIA). To identify molecular processes regulated by Cia4, synovial tissues from 
MHC-identical DA (severe erosive) and DA.F344(Cia4) congenics (mild nonerosive) 
rats were collected at preclinical and recent onset stages following the 
induction of PIA and analyzed for gene expression levels. Il6 levels were 
significantly higher in DA compared with congenics on day 10 (135-fold) after 
PIA induction (preclinical stage) and remained increased on days 14 (47.7-fold) 
and 18 (29.41-fold). Il6 increased before Il1b suggesting that Il6 could be 
driving Il1b expression and early synovial inflammation; 187 genes had 
significantly different expression levels and included inflammatory mediators 
increased in DA such Slpi (10.94-fold), Ccl7 (5.17-fold), and Litaf (2.09-fold). 
Syk or NF-ÎºB activating and interacting genes, including Cd74 Ccl21, were 
increased in DA; 59 genes implicated in cancer-related phenotypes were increased 
in DA. Genes involved in cell metabolism, transport across membranes, and tissue 
protection such as Dgat1, Dhcr7, and Slc1a1 were increased in DA.F344(Cia4) 
congenics; 21 genes differentially expressed or expressed in only one of the 
strains were located within the Cia4 interval and could be the gene accounting 
for the arthritis effect. In conclusion, the Cia4 interval contains at least one 
new arthritis gene that regulates early Il6, Il1b expression, and other 
inflammatory mediators. This gene regulates the expression of cancer genes that 
could mediate the development of synovial hyperplasia and invasion, and 
cartilage and bone destruction.
