Although genetic and non-genetic studies in mouse and human implicate the CD40 
pathway in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), there are no approved drugs that inhibit 
CD40 signaling for clinical care in RA or any other disease. Here, we sought to 
understand the biological consequences of a CD40 risk variant in RA discovered 
by a previous genome-wide association study (GWAS) and to perform a 
high-throughput drug screen for modulators of CD40 signaling based on human 
genetic findings. First, we fine-map the CD40 risk locus in 7,222 seropositive 
RA patients and 15,870 controls, together with deep sequencing of CD40 coding 
exons in 500 RA cases and 650 controls, to identify a single SNP that explains 
the entire signal of association (rs4810485, P = 1.4×10(-9)). Second, we 
demonstrate that subjects homozygous for the RA risk allele have ∼33% more CD40 
on the surface of primary human CD19+ B lymphocytes than subjects homozygous for 
the non-risk allele (P = 10(-9)), a finding corroborated by expression 
quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analysis in peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
from 1,469 healthy control individuals. Third, we use retroviral shRNA infection 
to perturb the amount of CD40 on the surface of a human B lymphocyte cell line 
(BL2) and observe a direct correlation between amount of CD40 protein and 
phosphorylation of RelA (p65), a subunit of the NF-κB transcription factor. 
Finally, we develop a high-throughput NF-κB luciferase reporter assay in BL2 
cells activated with trimerized CD40 ligand (tCD40L) and conduct an HTS of 1,982 
chemical compounds and FDA-approved drugs. After a series of counter-screens and 
testing in primary human CD19+ B cells, we identify 2 novel chemical inhibitors 
not previously implicated in inflammation or CD40-mediated NF-κB signaling. Our 
study demonstrates proof-of-concept that human genetics can be used to guide the 
development of phenotype-based, high-throughput small-molecule screens to 
identify potential novel therapies in complex traits such as RA.
