OBJECTIVE: Cartilage oligomeric matrix protein (COMP) is a major noncollagenous 
component of cartilage and is used as a biomarker in rheumatoid arthritis and 
experimental arthritis. Injection of COMP leads to severe inflammatory joint 
disease, and antibodies play a critical role in mediating arthritis. The 
arthritogenicity of COMP might be due to the lack of self tolerance. This study 
was undertaken to determine the status of COMP-specific B cell tolerance using 
COMP-deficient mice.
METHODS: Arthritis development and antibody responses were compared between 
COMP-sufficient and COMP-deficient littermates after immunization with rat COMP. 
Serum anti-COMP antibody levels were measured using a panel of recombinant mouse 
COMP proteins, and antibody-secreting cells were enumerated by enzyme-linked 
immunospot assays. A novel sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was 
developed to assess COMP molecules in serum.
RESULTS: COMP-sufficient mice, but not COMP-deficient mice, developed severe 
arthritis following immunization with rat COMP. However, anti-COMP antibody 
titers to native COMP and recombinant protein domains covering the entire mouse 
COMP sequence, except the less immunodominant type 3 repeat domains, were 
decreased in COMP-sufficient mice compared to COMP-deficient mice. In addition, 
COMP-sufficient mice had fewer B cells secreting COMP-reactive antibodies. 
Detectable levels of full-length COMP in arthritic COMP-sufficient B10.Q 
NCF-1(*/*) and healthy mice suggested systemic availability of COMP to the 
immune system.
CONCLUSION: The lack of arthritis, together with high levels of COMP-specific 
antibodies, in COMP-deficient mice indicates that susceptibility to arthritis is 
COMP specific and that endogenous expression of COMP in wild-type mice tolerizes 
B cells in vivo.
