Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease characterised by chronic 
inflammation of the synovial joints, joint malformations, and disability. The 
continuous use of conventional anti-inflammatory drugs is associated with severe 
adverse effects. Grape seed proanthocyanidin extract (GSPE) is considered to 
have protective effects against several diseases. In this study based on the 
mouse adjuvant-induced-arthritis (AIA) model, we examined the effects of GSPE on 
the key mediators of arthritic inflammation, namely T cell subsets, 
glucocorticoid-induced tumour necrosis factor receptor (GITR) expressing cells, 
CD4(+)CD25(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells, Th17 cells, Th1/Th2 cytokines, 
and inflammatory mediator gene expression. We treated BALB/c mice with 25, 50, 
or 100 mg/kg GSPE or saline daily (14 days) per orally (p.o.) at the onset of 
AIA. At the peak phase of AIA (day 14), the heparinised whole blood and ankle 
joints of all groups were collected and tested. GSPE-treated mice showed a 
substantial reduction in the levels of T cell subsets, GITR-expressing cells, 
and Th1 cytokines as well as the inflammatory mediators (MCP-1, MIP-2, and 
ICAM-1) that induce them compared with the vehicle-treated (saline) and 
arthritic mice. However, GSPE significantly upregulated the number of Tregs and 
Th2 cytokine producing cell number or it also induced Th17/Treg rebalance and 
orchestrated various pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines and the 
gene expression of their mediators that mediate cellular infiltration into the 
joints. This might, contribute to its anti-arthritic activity. Our results 
suggest that p.o. treatment with GSPE attenuated AIA in mice might offer a 
promising alternative/adjunct treatment for RA.
