OBJECTIVE: Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 is an inhibitory 
receptor primarily expressed by immune cells. This study was undertaken to 
define the role of this molecule in osteoclast differentiation and rheumatoid 
arthritis.
METHODS: In vitro osteoclast assays were performed to characterize the role of 
Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 in murine and human 
osteoclastogenesis. Human Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 
expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry staining in the synovium of 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. The levels of soluble Human 
Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 were determined by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: We found that multinucleated osteoclast formation from mouse bone 
marrow cells was inhibited by treatment with a monoclonal antibody against mouse 
Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 in vitro. By 
immunohistochemistry, we found that Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like 
receptor-1 was mainly expressed by macrophages in the inflamed synovial tissue 
of rheumatoid arthritis patients. In addition, serum and synovial fluid levels 
of soluble Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 were higher in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients compared to healthy controls or osteoarthritis 
patients. Moreover, overexpression of Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like 
receptor-1 in CD14+ monocytes from healthy volunteers also inhibited human 
osteoclastogenesis.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, these data demonstrate for the first time that 
Leukocyte-associated immunoglobulin-like receptor-1 inhibits osteoclastogenesis. 
Therefore, these results may have therapeutic implications for the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis.
