We report a case of intraoperative kinking of an endotracheal tube (ETT) in a 
prone patient during spine surgery. We postulate that one of the risk factors 
involved with kinking was the inadequate withdrawal maneuver of Pentax-AWS 
Airway Scope (AWS). Patient was a 69-year-old woman with hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus, and rheumatoid arthritis, undergoing C4-6 laminoplasty under general 
anesthesia in the prone position. A 7.0-mm polyvinyl endotracheal tube (Paker 
Flex-Tip Tube) was placed to 21 cm at the right angle of the mouse without 
difficulty using the AWS. Both peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) and partial 
pressure of end-tidal carbon dioxide began to rise gradually from 24 to 28 cmH2O 
and 38 to 44 mmHg, respectively. Although over 30 cmH2O in PIP repeatedly 
appeared after that, we did not find any remarkable change of ventilation except 
for weak breath sound. Thereafter, when we checked the tube with a flexible 
fiberoptic bronchoscope, it could not pass through the tube. At first, we asked 
the surgeon to release neck flexion as much as possible. This procedure could 
not correct the kink completely but allowed the passage of bronchoscope in the 
ETT. Then, we tried to reposition the ETT by inserting the bronchoscope beyond 
the point of kinking for maintaining luminal patency and adequate ventilation. 
The subsequent anesthetic course was uneventful. Kinking of the ETT in the oral 
cavity is an uncommon problem but we must keep in mind as one of the 
differential diagnoses. When using the AWS for endotracheal intubation, we 
recommend the confirmation of the position of the ETT to be normal in the oral 
cavity by direct laryngoscopy.
