Cinnamon bark (Cinnamomum zeylanicum Syn C. verum, family: Lauraceae) is one of 
the oldest traditional medicines for inflammatory- and pain-related disorders. 
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the efficacy of the 
polyphenol fraction from Cinnamomum zeylanicum bark (CPP) in animal models of 
inflammation and rheumatoid arthritis. Dose-response studies of CPP (50, 100, 
and 200 mg/kg) used in a separate set of in vivo experiments were conducted in 
acute (carrageenan-induced rat paw edema), subacute (cotton pellet-induced 
granuloma), and sub-chronic (AIA, adjuvant-induced established polyarthrtis) 
models of inflammation in rats and the acetic acid-induced writhing model of 
pain in mice. Effects of CPP on cytokine (IL-2, IL-4, and IFNγ) release from 
Concanavalin (ConA)-stimulated lymphocytes were also evaluated in vitro. CPP 
showed a strong and dose-dependent reduction in paw volume, weight loss reversal 
effects against carrageenan-induced paw edema, and cotton pellet-induced 
granuloma models in rats. CPP (200 mg/kg p.o. for 10 days) showed a significant 
reduction in elevated serum TNF-α concentration without causing gastric 
ulcerogenicity in the AIA model in rats. CPP also demonstrated mild analgesic 
effects during acute treatment as evidenced by the reduction in the writhing and 
paw withdrawal threshold of the inflamed rat paw during the acetic acid-induced 
writhing model and Randall-Selitto test. CPP was found to inhibit cytokine 
(IL-2, IL-4, and IFNγ) release from ConA-stimulated lymphocytes in vitro. In 
conclusion, CPP demonstrated prominent action in animal models of inflammation 
and arthritis and therefore can be considered as a potential anti-rheumatic 
agent with disease-modifying action.
