Glucocorticoids (GCs) are potent drugs to treat rheumatoid arthritis but exert 
adverse skeletal effects. Compound A (CpdA) is a selective GC receptor modulator 
with an improved risk/benefit profile in mouse models of inflammation and bone 
loss. Here we tested whether CpdA also exerts bone-sparing effects under 
proinflammatory circumstances using the collagen-induced arthritis model, a 
murine model of rheumatoid arthritis. CpdA decreased disease activity, paw 
swelling, and the paw temperature by 43%, 12%, and 7%, respectively, but was 
less potent than dexamethasone (DEX), which reduced these parameters by 72%, 
22%, and 10%, respectively. Moreover, T cells isolated from CpdA- and 
DEX-treated animals were less active based on proliferation rates after 
challenge with type II collagen and produced smaller amounts of interferon-Î³ and 
TNF as compared with T cells from PBS-treated mice. Histological assessment of 
the joints confirmed the weaker potency of CpdA as compared with DEX in 
preventing infiltration of inflammatory cells, induction of osteoclastogenesis, 
and destruction of articular cartilage. Due to the lack of GC-susceptible 
arthritis models, we were not able to fully address the bone-sparing potential 
of CpdA in inflammatory conditions. Nevertheless, the bone formation marker 
procollagen type 1 N-terminal peptide, a surrogate marker for GC-mediated 
suppression of bone formation, was significantly decreased by DEX in arthritic 
mice but not by CpdA. Our data indicate that CpdA moderately suppresses 
inflammation, whereas the concurrent effects on bone remain unknown. In light of 
its narrow therapeutic range, CpdA may be more useful as a molecular tool for 
dissecting GC actions rather than a therapeutic agent.
