Targeting angiogenesis could be an excellent strategy to combat 
angiogenesis-dependent pathophysiological conditions such as cancer, rheumatoid 
arthritis, obesity, systemic lupus erythematosus, psoriasis, proliferative 
retinopathy and atherosclerosis. Recently a number of clinical investigations 
are being undertaken to assess the potential therapeutic application of various 
anti-angiogenic agents. Many of these angiogenesis inhibitors are directed 
against the functions of endothelial cells, which are considered as the building 
blocks of blood vessels. Similarly, roots of a traditional medicinal plant, 
Eurycoma longifolia, can be used as an alternative treatment to prevent and 
treat the angiogenesis-related diseases. In the present study, antiangiogenic 
potential of partially purified quassinoid-rich fraction (TAF273) of E. 
longifolia root extract was evaluated using ex vivo and in vivo angiogenesis 
models and the anti-angiogenic efficacy of TAF273 was investigated in human 
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). TAF273 caused significant suppression 
in sprouting of microvessels in rat aorta with IC50 11.5μg/ml. TAF273 (50μg/ml) 
showed remarkable inhibition (63.13%) of neovascularization in chorioallantoic 
membrane of chick embryo. Tumor histology also revealed marked reduction in 
extent of vascularization. In vitro, TAF273 significantly inhibited the major 
angiogenesis steps such as proliferation, migration and differentiation of 
HUVECs. Phytochemical analysis revealed high content of quassinoids in TAF273. 
Specially, HPLC characterization showed that TAF273 is enriched with 
eurycomanone, 13α(21)-epoxyeurycomanone and eurycomanol. These results 
demonstrated that the antiangiogenic activity of TAF273 may be due to its 
inhibitory effect on endothelial cell proliferation, differentiation and 
migration which could be attributed to the high content of quassinoids in E. 
longifolia.
