BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic systemic inflammatory 
autoimmune disease. Long-term use of currently available therapies for RA 
produces adverse effects that limit dosage and duration; hence there is a need 
for safe and effective alternatives suitable for long term chronic use. UP446, a 
composition consisting primarily of baicalin from Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi 
(Family: Lamiaceae) and (+)-catechin from the heartwoods of Acacia catechu 
(Family: Mimosaceae), has been previously shown to reduce production of 
eicosanoids and leukotrienes through dual inhibition of cyclooxygenase (COX) and 
lipoxygenase (LOX) enzymes and to decreased mRNA and protein levels of the 
proinflammatory cytokines, interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-α.
AIM: To evaluate the likelihood of UP446 in moderating arthritis and its 
associated symptoms in an experimental animal model of RA.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A RA rat model was induced by injecting Freund's complete 
adjuvant into left and right hind paw and base of the tail. Animals were 
administered UP446 (50 mg/kg), ibuprofen (150 mg/kg mg/kg) or vehicle by oral 
gavage 30 min prior to arthritis induction and each day thereafter for 14 days.
RESULT: Animals treated with UP446 showed 23.7, 31.9, 33.4, 29.3, and 33.1% 
reduction in pain sensitivity; 46.0, 36.7, 33.7, 34.8, and 33.4% reduction in 
ankle diameter on days 3, 5, 7, 9, and 13; respectively; compared to vehicle. 
Similarly paw edema was significantly reduced with an average of 30% for the 
first inflammatory reaction period (day 1-8) followed by 37.1 and 33.6% 
reduction on day 9 and 13.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate potential benefit of UP446 in alleviating 
symptoms of RA and support human clinical evaluation of this botanical 
composition in patients with RA.
