It is believed that in utero environmental factors contribute to autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD). The goal of this study was to demonstrate, using the largest 
cohort reported so far, that mothers of an ASD child have an elevated frequency 
of anti-brain antibodies and to assess whether brain reactivity is associated 
with an autoimmune diathesis of the mother. We screened plasma of 2431 mothers 
of an ASD child from Simon Simplex Collection and plasma of 653 unselected women 
of child-bearing age for anti-brain antibodies using immunohistology on mouse 
brain. Positive and negative plasma from mothers with an ASD child were analyzed 
for anti-nuclear antibodies and for autoimmune disorders. Mothers of an ASD 
child were four times more likely to harbor anti-brain antibodies than 
unselected women of child-bearing age (10.5 vs 2.6%). A second cohort from The 
Autism Genetic Resource Exchange with multiplex families displayed an 8.8% 
prevalence of anti-brain antibodies in the mothers of these families. 
Fifty-three percent of these mothers with anti-brain antibodies also exhibited 
anti-nuclear autoantibodies compared with 13.4% of mothers of an ASD child 
without anti-brain antibodies and 15% of control women of child-bearing age. The 
analysis of ASD mothers with brain-reactive antibodies also revealed an 
increased prevalence of autoimmune diseases, especially rheumatoid arthritis and 
systemic lupus erythematosus. This study provides robust evidence that 
brain-reactive antibodies are increased in mothers of an ASD child and may be 
associated with autoimmunity. The current study serves as a benchmark and 
justification for studying the potential pathogenicity of these antibodies on 
the developing brain. The detailed characterization of the specificity of these 
antibodies will provide practical benefits for the management and prevention of 
this disorder.
