The JAKs receive continued interest as therapeutic targets for autoimmune, 
inflammatory, and oncological diseases. JAKs play critical roles in the 
development and biology of the hematopoietic system, as evidenced by mouse and 
human genetics. JAK1 is critical for the signal transduction of many type I and 
type II inflammatory cytokine receptors. In a search for JAK small molecule 
inhibitors, GLPG0634 was identified as a lead compound belonging to a novel 
class of JAK inhibitors. It displayed a JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor profile in 
biochemical assays, but subsequent studies in cellular and whole blood assays 
revealed a selectivity of âˆ¼30-fold for JAK1- over JAK2-dependent signaling. 
GLPG0634 dose-dependently inhibited Th1 and Th2 differentiation and to a lesser 
extent the differentiation of Th17 cells in vitro. GLPG0634 was well exposed in 
rodents upon oral dosing, and exposure levels correlated with repression of Mx2 
expression in leukocytes. Oral dosing of GLPG0634 in a therapeutic set-up in a 
collagen-induced arthritis model in rodents resulted in a significant 
dose-dependent reduction of the disease progression. Paw swelling, bone and 
cartilage degradation, and levels of inflammatory cytokines were reduced by 
GLPG0634 treatment. Efficacy of GLPG0634 in the collagen-induced arthritis 
models was comparable to the results obtained with etanercept. In conclusion, 
the JAK1 selective inhibitor GLPG0634 is a promising novel therapeutic with 
potential for oral treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and possibly other 
immune-inflammatory diseases.
