Little is known about the genes regulating disease severity and joint damage in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). In the present study we analyzed the gene expression 
characteristics of synovial tissues from four different strains congenic for 
non-MHC loci that develop mild and nonerosive arthritis compared with severe and 
erosive DA rats. DA.F344(Cia3d), DA.F344(Cia5a), DA.ACI(Cia10), and 
DA.ACI(Cia25) rats developed mild arthritis compared with DA. We found 685 genes 
with significantly different expression between congenics and DA, independent of 
the specific congenic interval, suggesting that these genes represent a new 
nongenetic core group of mediators of arthritis severity. This core group 
includes genes not previously implicated or with unclear role in arthritis 
severity, such as Tnn, Clec4m, and Spond1 among others, increased in DA. The 
core genes also included Scd1, Selenbp1, and Slc7a10, increased in congenics. 
Genes implicated in nuclear receptor activity, xenobiotic and lipid metabolism 
were also increased in the congenics, correlating with protection. Several 
disease mediators were among the core genes reduced in congenics, including 
IL-6, IL-17, and Ccl2. Analyses of upstream regulators (genes, pathways, or 
chemicals) suggested reduced activation of Stat3 and TLR-related genes and 
chemicals in congenics. Additionally, cigarette smoking was among the upstream 
regulators activated in DA, while p53 was an upstream regulator activated in 
congenics. We observed congenic-specific differential expression and detection 
in each individual strain. In conclusion, this new nongenetically regulated core 
genes of disease severity or protection in arthritis should provide new insight 
into critical pathways and potential new environmental risk factor for 
arthritis.
