Shuangtengbitong tincture (STBT), a clinical prescription from the Fujian 
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) Affiliated People's Hospital 
(Fuzhou, China), has been used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) for 
~10 years. The aim of the current study was to conﬁrm the anti-RA effect of STBT 
and to evaluate the potential mechanisms underlying collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) in rats. CIA model Wistar rats were induced with bovine type II collagen. 
The rats were immunized with CIA and were treated with STBT (0.5 and 2 
ml/injection) and votalin (~1 cm/injection) continuously for ~1 month. Following 
treatment, the pathological sections of CIA rat joints were observed by 
hematoxylin and eosin staining, expression of toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4), 
myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) and nuclear transcription factor-κB 
(NF-κB) were investigated by western blot analysis and reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis. Following treatment, 
STBT significantly suppressed paw swelling (P<0.05) compared with the model 
group and increased body weight. STBT also reversed pathological changes, 
STBT‑treated rats showed a signiﬁcant improvement of synovial hyperplasia, 
inﬂammatory inﬁltration, and cartilage and bone destruction. The levels of 
protein and mRNA expression of TLR4, MyD88 and NF-κB were markedly suppressed in 
the synovial tissue of STBT‑ and votalin-treated rats. In addition, STBT showed 
marked inhibition of the levels of protein and mRNA expression of TLR4, MyD88 
and NF-κB at an STBT volume ranging between 1 and 4 ml/day, indicating that the 
inhibition was volume dependent. These results show that STBT inhibits CIA and 
may be correlated with TLR4, MyD88 and NF-κB expression.
