Activation of the nuclear transcription factor κB (NF-κB) regulates the 
expression of inflammatory genes crucially involved in the pathogenesis of 
inflammatory diseases. NF-κB governs the expression of adhesion molecules that 
play a pivotal role in leukocyte-endothelium interactions. We uncovered the 
crucial role of NF-κB activation within endothelial cells in models of 
immune-mediated diseases using a "sneaking ligand construct" (SLC) selectively 
inhibiting NF-κB in the activated endothelium. The recombinant SLC1 consists of 
three modules: (i) an E-selectin targeting domain, (ii) a Pseudomonas exotoxin A 
translocation domain, and (iii) a NF-κB Essential Modifier-binding effector 
domain interfering with NF-κB activation. The E-selectin-specific SLC1 inhibited 
NF-κB by interfering with endothelial IκB kinase 2 activity in vitro and in 
vivo. In murine experimental peritonitis, the application of SLC1 drastically 
reduced the extravasation of inflammatory cells. Furthermore, SLC1 treatment 
significantly ameliorated the disease course in murine models of rheumatoid 
arthritis. Our data establish that endothelial NF-κB activation is critically 
involved in the pathogenesis of arthritis and can be selectively inhibited in a 
cell type- and activation stage-dependent manner by the SLC approach. Moreover, 
our strategy is applicable to delineating other pathogenic signaling pathways in 
a cell type-specific manner and enables selective targeting of distinct cell 
populations to improve effectiveness and risk-benefit ratios of therapeutic 
interventions.
