BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, systemic autoimmune 
inflammatory disorder. Many methods have been used to observe the progress of 
RA. The purpose of this study was to observe the progress of RA in rats with 
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography 
(PET/CT), magnetic resonance (MR) imaging and arthritis score, and analyze the 
relationships among different methods in evaluation of RA.
METHODS: Sixteen healthy Sprague Dawley (SD) rats about 8-week old were randomly 
assigned to a RA group and a control group. Bovine type II emulsified incomplete 
Freud's adjuvant was used to induce arthritis in the RA group. Arthritis score 
of the rats in two groups were recorded, and (18)F-FDG PET/CT, MR imaging were 
performed both on the corresponding rats every 3 days. All the rats were 
sacrificed at week 5, and histopathological examination was performed on rat 
knees stained with haematoxylin and eosin.
RESULTS: The arthritis score and the standard uptake value (SUV) of knee joints 
in RA rats increased with the progression of arthritis gradually. Both peaks of 
arthritis score and SUV appeared at 21 days after the first immune injection, 
then the arthritis score and SUV of knee joints decreased slowly. The arthritis 
scores of knee joints in RA rats were positively correlated with their SUV 
changes. The MR images were confirmed by the histopathological studies.
CONCLUSION: PET/CT can detect the earliest molecular metabolism changes of RA, 
and MR imaging can follow up the dynamical anatomical changes of RA, all of 
which indicated that PET/CT and MR imaging may be applied as useful tools to 
monitor the progress of RA.
