Collagens, the most abundant proteins in animals, also occur in some recently 
described nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses such as Mimiviridae, which 
replicate in amoebae. To clarify the impact of viral collagens on the immune 
response of animals exposed to Mimiviridae, we have investigated the 
localization of collagens in Acanthamoeba polyphaga mimivirus particles and the 
response of mice to immunization with mimivirus particles. Using protein 
biotinylation, we have first shown that viral collagen encoded by open reading 
frame L71 is present at the surface of mimivirus particles. Exposure to 
mimivirus collagens elicited the production of anti-collagen antibodies in DBA/1 
mice immunized intradermally with mimivirus protein extracts. This antibody 
response also targeted mouse collagen type II and was accompanied by T-cell 
reactivity to collagen and joint inflammation, as observed in collagen-induced 
arthritis following immunization of mice with bovine collagen type II. The broad 
distribution of nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses in the environment suggests 
that humans are constantly exposed to such large virus particles. A survey of 
blood sera from healthy human subjects and from rheumatoid arthritis patients 
indeed demonstrated that 30% of healthy-subject and 36% of rheumatoid arthritis 
sera recognized the major mimivirus capsid protein L425. Moreover, whereas 6% of 
healthy-subject sera recognized the mimivirus collagen protein L71, 22% of 
rheumatoid arthritis sera were positive for mimivirus L71. Accordingly, our 
study shows that environmental exposure to mimivirus represents a risk factor in 
triggering autoimmunity to collagens.
