Chronic pain and cognitive decline are characteristic symptoms of rheumatoid 
arthritis. One of the immediate early gene c-fos is overexpressed during 
peripheral and central noxious conditions and can be used as a marker for 
neuronal activity/excitability. In the adjuvant-induced arthritis Sprague-Dawley 
rat model, we examined the dynamics of c-Fos protein and mRNA expression in the 
amygdala, cortex, hippocampus, and thalamus and evaluated the effects of 
N-(2-hydroxy phenyl) acetamide (NA-2), a derivative of salicylic acid. The paw 
volume was assessed as an indicator of peripheral edema and the hyperalgesia 
associated with arthritis was monitored by gait analysis. The region of 
interests of the brain from arthritic and non-arthritic animals were used to 
isolate the RNA and were then reverse transcribed into cDNA. The PCR products 
were electrophoresed on 1% agarose gel and the gels were visualized in gel-doc 
system. The frozen brain sections were stained for c-Fos using 
immunohistochemistry. Negative control experiments were performed without the 
primary and secondary antibodies to rule out the nonspecific tissue binding of 
antibodies. We report a significant increase in the c-Fos expression in the 
arthritic control animals. In comparison to the control group, the treatment of 
NA-2 treatment was found to block the development of the arthritis-induced c-Fos 
protein and mRNA expression and peripheral edema. It also significantly reduces 
the gait deficits which were otherwise observed in the arthritic control group. 
Both the immunohistochemistry and PCR analysis revealed NA-2 to be more potent 
in comparison to member of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
