INTRODUCTION: Etanercept is a fusion protein consisting of the soluble portion 
of the p75-tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) and the Fc fragment of human 
IgG1, which is often used for the treatment of patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. F8-IL10 is a human immunocytokine based on the F8 antibody and 
interleukin-10, which is currently being investigated in rheumatoid arthritis 
with promising clinical results. We have aimed at expressing murine versions of 
these two fusion proteins, in order to assess their pharmaceutical performance 
in the collagen-induced model of rheumatoid arthritis in the mouse.
METHODS: Two fusion proteins (termed muTNFR-Fc and F8-muIL10) were cloned, 
expressed in chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, purified and characterized. 
Biological activity of muTNFR-Fc was assessed by its ability to inhibit 
TNF-induced killing of mouse fibroblasts, while F8-muIL10 was characterized in 
terms of muIL10 activity, of binding affinity to the cognate antigen of F8, the 
alternatively-spliced EDA domain of fibronectin, by quantitative biodistribution 
analysis and in vivo imaging. The therapeutic activity of both fusion proteins 
was investigated in a collagen-induced mouse model of arthritis. Mouse plasma 
was analyzed for anti-drug antibody formation and cytokine levels were 
determined by bead-based multiplex technology. The association of F8-IL10 
proteins with blood cells was studied in a centrifugation assay with 
radiolabeled protein.
RESULTS: Both fusion proteins exhibited excellent purity and full biological 
activity in vitro. In addition, F8-muIL10 was able to localize on newly-formed 
blood vessels in vivo. When used in a murine model of arthritis, the two 
proteins inhibited arthritis progression. The activity of muTNFR-Fc was tested 
alone and in combination with F8-huIL10. The chimeric version of F8-IL10 was not 
better then the fully human fusion protein and showed similar generation of 
mouse anti-fusion protein antibodies. Incubation studies of F8-muIL10 and 
F8-huIL10 with blood revealed that only the fully human fusion protein is not 
associated with cellular components at concentrations as low as 0.2 Î¼g/ml, thus 
facilitating its extravasation from blood vessels.
CONCLUSIONS: The described products may represent useful research tools for the 
study of the anti-arthritic properties of TNF blockade and of IL10-based 
immunocytokines in syngeneic immunocompetent models of arthritis.
