OBJECTIVE: To analyze the combination therapy of Sinomenine (SIN) and 
Methotrexate (MTX) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), we herein demonstrated the 
combination effect of SIN and MTX on collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in rats 
through their modulation on osteoclast-related cytokines.
METHODS: CIA was induced by the immunization of type II collagen (CII) in SD 
rats. SIN and MTX were administrated alone or in combination after the onset of 
arthritis. Arthritis index and histological analysis were used to evaluate the 
effect of treatments. Effects of SIN and MTX on expression of receptor activator 
of NF-ÎºB ligand (RANKL) and osteopontin (OPN) in synovial tissues were assayed 
by immunohistochemistry. RANKL, osteoprotegerin (OPG), IL-6, IL-17 and matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in rat serum were measured by ELISA. The expression of 
osteoclast-related cytokines in fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) from RA 
patients was assayed by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: SIN and MTX combination additively reduced the inflammatory symptoms 
and joint damage in CIA. Combination of SIN and MTX significantly repressed 
synovial RANKL and OPN production. SIN and MTX exhibited complementary and 
synergistic effect upon down-regulating RANKL, IL-6, IL-17 and MMPs in rat 
serum. SIN and MTX also modulated the expression of RANKL and OPG in RA-FLS.
CONCLUSION: SIN and MTX have additive effects, decreasing inflammation and joint 
damage in CIA rats by modulating osteoclast-related cytokines. These results are 
indicative of the combined effect of SIN and MTX for anti-arthritic treatment in 
RA.
