Joint damage in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by cartilage and bone 
loss resulting in pain, deformity, and loss of joint function. 
Anti-citrullinated protein antibody (ACPA) has been implicated in RA 
pathogenesis and predicts radiographical joint damage and clinical severity. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to assess bone loss by micro-CT, 
histological joint damage, and ACPA levels using a mouse model of RA. Arthritis 
was induced by immunizing DBA/1 mice with autologous citrullinated type II mouse 
collagen (CIT-CII) weekly for 4 weeks. Mice immunized with autologous CII served 
as controls. At week 5, mice were killed, ACPA levels determined, and micro-CT 
performed to quantitatively analyze bone damage. Micro-CT analysis revealed 
significant loss of bone density, volume, and surface (p < 0.05) in bone 
peripheral to the inflamed joints of CIT-CII animals compared to CII controls. 
Histological staining demonstrated cartilage, proteoglycan, joint collagen, and 
bone collagen loss in the CIT-CII group compared to CII. Serum ACPA levels were 
increased (p = 0.03) in the CIT-CII group compared to CII, and these levels were 
inversely correlated with bone quantity and quality. In this study, we 
demonstrate that immunization with autologous CIT-CII initiates significant 
systemic bone and articular cartilage loss in the absence of adjuvant. 
Significant inverse correlations of circulating ACPA and bone quality/quantity 
were present. ACPA levels predict the adverse bone morphological changes in this 
model of early RA.
