Abstract The SCID mouse model for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an established 
and reliable approach to examining the distinct mechanisms operative in RA 
synovium, and evaluating novel gene therapy strategies. However, serum 
concentrations of circulating gene therapy products following gene transfer are 
frequently too low to allow detection. This problem stimulated us to develop a 
novel implantation technique to improve the yield of these soluble gene 
products. Synovial fibroblasts from patients with RA were cultured, passaged, 
and transduced with Ad5 sTNFRp55:Ig. sTNFRp55:Ig production was confirmed by 
ELISA, and then cells were implanted into SCID mice using a novel implantation 
strategy in which pieces of human cartilage were engrafted into a 
fibroblast-saturated inert sponge. Thereafter, the sponges were implanted under 
the skin of the mice instead of under the kidney capsule, as in the original 
approach, allowing co-implantation of larger pieces of cartilage together with 
higher numbers of adenovirus-transduced RA synovial fibroblasts. The improved 
implantation technique not only resulted in a reduction in the number of mice 
needed in each experiment by approximately 60%, and a reduction of the time 
taken for surgery by about 50%, but also considerably enhanced the serum 
concentrations of the gene product sTNFRp55-Ig, allowing detection of the 
soluble TNF receptor p55 by standard ELISA. In summary, the improved 
implantation technique for the SCID mouse model for RA results in more economic 
animal treatment, and facilitates the detection and quantification of 
circulating gene products following adenovirus-based gene transfer into synovial 
fibroblasts.
