Disturbed expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) in regulatory T cells (Tregs) leads 
to development of autoimmunity in experimental mouse models. However, the miRNA 
expression signature characterizing Tregs of autoimmune diseases, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has not been determined yet. In this study, we have 
used a microarray approach to comprehensively analyze miRNA expression 
signatures of both naive Tregs (CD4+CD45RO-CD25++) and memory Tregs 
(CD4+CD45RO+CD25+++), as well as conventional naive (CD4+CD45RO-CD25-) and 
memory (CD4+CD45RO+CD25-) T cells (Tconvs) derived from peripheral blood of RA 
patients and matched healthy controls. Differential expression of selected 
miRNAs was validated by TaqMan-based quantitative reverse transcription-PCR. We 
found a positive correlation between increased expression of miR-451 in T cells 
of RA patients and disease activity score (DAS28), erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate levels and serum levels of interleukin-6. Moreover, we found 
characteristic, disease- and treatment-independent, global miRNA expression 
signatures defining naive Tregs, memory Tregs, naive Tconvs and memory Tconvs. 
The analysis allowed us to define miRNAs characteristic for a general naive 
phenotype (for example, miR-92a) and a general memory phenotype (for example, 
miR-21, miR-155). Importantly, the analysis allowed us to define miRNAs that are 
specifically expressed in both naive and memory Tregs, defining as such miRNA 
signature characterizing the Treg phenotype (that is, miR-146a, miR-3162, 
miR-1202, miR-1246 and miR-4281).
