Rheumatoid arthritis is most prominently characterized by synoviocyte 
hyperplasia which therefore serves as an important target for clinical therapy. 
In the present study, it was observed that menthol, the specific agonist of 
transient receptor potential melastatin subtype 8 (TRPM8), could induce 
sustained increases of cytosolic calcium concentration ([Ca(2+)]c) in 
synoviocytes isolated from collagen-induced arthritis rats in dose-dependent 
manner, which was evidently blocked by applying an extracellular Ca(2+)-free 
buffer. Menthol-induced [Ca(2+)]c increase was also significantly inhibited by 
potent TRPM8 antagonist capsazepine (CZP), indicating that this [Ca(2+)]c 
elevation was mostly attributed to TRPM8-mediated Ca(2+) entry. Besides, RT-PCR 
indeed demonstrated presence of TRPM8 in the synoviocytes. Meanwhile, it was 
found that menthol evoked production of intracellular reactive oxygen species, 
which could be abolished by Ca(2+) free solutions or CZP. Further experiments 
showed that menthol reduced the cell numbers and survival of synoviocytes. This 
reduction was associated with apoptosis as suggested by mitochondrial membrane 
depolarization, nuclear condensation and a caspase 3/7 apoptotic assay. 
Menthol-induced death and apoptosis of synoviocytes both were obviously 
inhibited by CZP, intracellular calcium chelator BAPTA-AM, and reactive oxygen 
species inhibitor diphenylene iodonium, respectively. Taken together, our data 
indicated that menthol resulted in synoviocyte death associated with apoptosis 
via calcium entry and reactive oxygen species production depending on TRPM8 
activation.
