OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy of a novel inhibitor for IκB 
kinase alpha (IKKα), noraristeromycin (NAM), for murine experimental model of 
rheumatoid arthritis, collagen- induced arthritis (CIA).
METHODS: NAM has been chemically synthesized as reported earlier. CIA was 
induced in DBA/1JNCrlj mice by intradermal inoculation of bovine type II 
collagen (col II) together with Freund Complete Adjuvant. Following the Day 21 
booster injection of col II with Freund Incomplete Adjuvant, the animals were 
monitored for the development of arthritis and clinically evaluated. NAM was 
administered orally at different doses prior to induction (prophylactic 
protocol) or after the emergence of definitive arthritis (therapeutic protocol).
RESULTS: Here we demonstrate the experimental evidence that oral administration 
of NAM could completely prevent the occurrence of experimental arthritis in CIA 
mouse model at 0.3 mg/kg with ED50 value of approximately 0.1 mg/kg twice daily. 
Moreover, twice daily oral therapeutic dosage of 1 mg/kg of NAM significantly 
inhibited the paw swelling and disease progression even after the occurrence of 
experimental CIA. In addition, NAM exhibited an excellent pharmacokinetics in 
mice and oral administration of NAM could suppress the production of TNFα 
elicited by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicated that IKKα inhibition is an effective novel 
therapy for the treatment of chronic inflammatory processes such as those 
associated with RA and other related conditions.
