INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is characterized by enhanced blood 
vessel development in joint synovium. This involves the recruitment of 
endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs), allowing for de novo vessel formation and 
pro-inflammatory cell infiltration. Inhibitor of DNA Binding 1 (Id1) is a 
transcription factor characteristic of EPCs that influences cell maturation.
METHOD: Enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA) and polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) were used to examine Id1 levels in synovial fluid (SF) and endothelial 
cells (ECs), respectively. Immunohistology was used to determine the expression 
of Id1 in synovial tissue (ST). Human dermal microvascular EC (HMVEC) migration 
and tube forming assays were used to determine if recombinant human Id1 (rhuId1) 
and/or RA SF immunodepleted Id1 showed angiogenic activity. We also utilized the 
RA ST severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mouse chimera to examine if Id1 
recruits EPCs to RA synovium.
RESULTS: ST samples immunostained for Id1 showed heightened expression in RA 
compared to osteoarthritis (OA) and normal (NL) ST. By immunofluorescence 
staining, we found significantly more Id1 in RA compared to OA and NL 
vasculature, showing that Id1 expressing cells, and therefore EPCs, are most 
active in vascular remodeling in the RA synovium. We also detected significantly 
more Id1 in RA compared to OA and other arthritis SFs by ELISA, which correlates 
highly with Chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 16 (CXCL16) levels. In vitro 
chemotaxis assays showed that Id1 is highly chemotactic for HMVECs and can be 
attenuated by inhibition of Nuclear Factor ÎºB and phosphoinositide 3-kinase. 
Using in vitro Matrigel assays, we found that HMVECs form tubes in response to 
rhuId1 and that Id1 immunodepleted from RA SF profoundly decreases tube 
formation in Matrigel in vitro. PCR showed that Id1 mRNA could be up-regulated 
in EPCs compared to HMVECs in response to CXCL16. Finally, using the K/BxN serum 
induced arthritis model, we found that EC CXCR6 correlated with Id1 expression 
by immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that Id1 correlates highly with CXCL16 expression, EPC 
recruitment, and blood vessel formation in the RA joint, and that Id1 is 
potently angiogenic and can be up-regulated in EPCs by CXCL16.
