The ability of blood vessels to sense and respond to stimuli such as fluid flow, 
shear stress, and trafficking of immune cells is critical to the proper function 
of the vascular system. Endothelial cells constantly remodel their cell-cell 
junctions and the underlying cytoskeletal network in response to these exogenous 
signals. This remodeling, which depends on regulation of the linkage between 
actin and integral junction proteins, is controlled by a complex signaling 
network consisting of small G proteins and their various downstream effectors. 
In this commentary, we summarize recent developments in understanding the small 
G protein RAP1 and its effector RASIP1 as critical mediators of endothelial 
junction stabilization, and the relationship between RAP1 effectors and 
modulation of different subsets of endothelial junctions. Â  The vasculature is a 
dynamic organ that is constantly exposed to a variety of signaling stimuli and 
mechanical stresses. In embryogenesis, nascent blood vessels form via a process 
termed vasculogenesis, wherein mesodermally derived endothelial precursor cells 
aggregate into cords, which subsequently form a lumen that permits trafficking 
of plasma and erythrocytes. (1)(,) (2) Angiogenesis occurs after establishment 
of this primitive vascular network, where new vessels sprout from existing 
vessels, migrate into newly expanded tissues, and anastomose to form a 
functional and complex circulatory network. (1)(,) (2) In the mouse, this 
process occurs through the second half of embryogenesis and into postnatal 
development in some tissues, such as the developing retinal vasculature. (3) 
Further, angiogenesis occurs in a variety of pathological conditions, such as 
diabetic retinopathy, age-related macular degeneration, inflammatory diseases 
such as rheumatoid arthritis, wound healing, and tumor growth. (1)(,) (2)(,) (4) 
Both vasculogenesis and angiogenesis are driven through signaling by vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and therapeutic agents targeting this pathway 
have shown efficacy in a number of diseases. (5)(-) (9) Blood vessels must have 
a sufficient degree of integrity so as to not allow indiscriminate leak of 
plasma proteins and blood cells into the underlying tissue. However, vessels 
must be able to sense their environment, respond to local conditions, and 
mediate the regulated passage of protein, fluid, and cells. For example, 
endothelial cells are the primary point of attachment for immune cells leaving 
the blood stream and entering tissue, and leukocytes subsequently migrate either 
through the endothelial cell body itself (the transcellular route), or through 
transient disassembly of cell-cell junctions (the paracellular route). (10) 
Precise regulation of endothelial junctions is critical to the proper 
maintenance of vascular integrity and related processes, and disruption of 
vascular cell-cell contacts is an underlying cause or contributor to numerous 
pathologies such as cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM) and hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT). (11)(-) (13) Understanding the basic 
mechanisms of endothelial junction formation and maintenance will therefore lead 
to a greater chance of success of therapeutic intervention in these pathologic 
conditions, especially in instances where targeting of VEGF signaling is 
insufficient to resolve vascular abnormalities.
