INTRODUCTION: Early diagnosis of and subsequent monitoring of therapy for 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) could benefit from detection of (sub)clinical 
synovitis. Imaging of (sub)clinical arthritis by targeting the translocator 
protein (TSPO) on activated macrophages is feasible using (R)-[¹¹C] 
PK11195-based positron emission tomography (PET), but clinical applications are 
limited by background uptake in peri-articular bone/bone marrow. The purpose of 
the present study was to evaluate two other TSPO ligands with potentially lower 
background uptake in neurological studies, [¹¹C]DPA-713 and [¹⁸F]DPA-714, in a 
rat model of arthritis.
METHODS: TSPO binding of DPA-713, DPA-714 and PK11195 were assessed by in vitro 
competition studies with [³H]DPA-713 using human macrophage THP-1 cells and 
CD14⁺ monocytes from healthy volunteers. In vivo studies were performed in rats 
with methylated bovine serum albumin-induced knee arthritis. 
Immunohistochemistry with anti-TSPO antibody was performed on paraffin-embedded 
sections. Rats were imaged with [¹¹C]DPA-713 or [¹⁸F]DPA-714 PET, followed by ex 
vivo tissue distribution studies. Results were compared with those obtained with 
the tracer (R)-[¹¹C]PK11195, the established ligand for TSPO.
RESULTS: In THP-1 cells, relative TSPO binding of DPA-713 and DPA-714 were 
7-fold and 25-fold higher, respectively, than in PK11195. Comparable results 
were observed in CD14⁺ monocytes from healthy volunteers. In the arthritis rat 
model, immunohistochemistry confirmed the presence of TSPO-positive inflammatory 
cells in the arthritic knee. PET images showed that uptake of [¹¹C]DPA-713 and 
[¹⁸F]DPA-714 in arthritic knees was significantly increased compared with 
contralateral knees and knees of normal rats. Uptake in arthritic knees could be 
largely blocked by an excess of PK11195. [¹¹C]DPA-713 and [¹⁸F]DPA-714 provided 
improved contrast compared with (R)-[¹¹C]PK11195, as was shown by significantly 
higher arthritic knee-to-bone ratios of [¹¹C]DPA-713 (1.60 ± 0.31) and 
[¹⁸F]DPA-714 (1.55 ± 0.10) compared with (R)-[¹¹C]PK11195 (1.14 ± 0.19).
CONCLUSIONS: [¹¹C]DPA-713 and [¹⁸F]DPA-714 clearly visualized arthritis and 
exhibited lower (peri-articular) bone/bone marrow uptake than (R)-[¹¹C]PK11195. 
These features merit further investigation of these tracers for early diagnosis 
and therapy monitoring of RA in a clinical setting.
