OBJECTIVE: Colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF-1R) essentially modulates 
monocyte proliferation, migration, and activation, which are considered 
important for the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We undertook this 
study to determine CSF-1R expression in human RA as well as the efficacy of a 
specific anti-CSF-1R monoclonal antibody (AFS98) in 2 different animal models of 
RA.
METHODS: CSF-1R expression was examined in blood, synovium, and bone samples 
from RA patients, osteoarthritis (OA) patients, and healthy subjects. The 
efficacy of AFS98 was examined by clinical assessment, histology, and bone 
histomorphometry in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and serum-transfer 
arthritis.
RESULTS: CSF-1R expression was increased in the synovium of RA patients compared 
to OA patients and healthy controls in fibroblast-like synoviocytes, follicular 
dendritic cells, macrophages, and osteoclasts. Circulating RA monocytes and 
neutrophils but not lymphocytes were CSF-1R+. In mice, blockade of CSF-1R 
abrogated cartilage damage, bone erosion, and systemic bone loss, and this was 
associated with the depletion of osteoclasts in both models. While blockade of 
CSF-1R did not affect inflammation in passive serum-transfer arthritis, it 
significantly reduced inflammation in CIA, and this was associated with the 
absence of synovial macrophages and reduced splenic CD11b+Gr-1- monocytes.
CONCLUSION: CSF-1R was broadly expressed in human RA. Blockade of CSF-1R 
protected against bone and cartilage destruction in both mouse models and also 
showed significant antiinflammatory effects in the CIA model. These data provide 
evidence for CSF-1R as a therapeutic target in RA.
