BACKGROUND: We have previously reported a continuous activation of caspase-1 and 
increased interleukin (IL)-1β levels in early rheumatoid arthritis (RA). These 
observations raised the hypothesis that drugs targeting the IL-1β pathway, in 
addition to tumour necrosis factor (TNF), may be particularly effective for 
early RA treatment. We have recently identified gambogic acid as a promising 
therapeutic candidate to simultaneously block IL-1β and TNF secretion. Our main 
goal here was to investigate whether gambogic acid administration was able to 
attenuate inflammation in antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) rats.
METHODS: Gambogic acid was administered to AIA rats in the early and late phases 
of arthritis. The inflammatory score, ankle perimeter, and body weight were 
evaluated during the period of treatment. Rats were sacrificed after 19 days of 
disease progression and paw samples were collected for histological and 
immunohistochemical evaluation.
RESULTS: We found that inflammation in joints was significantly suppressed 
following gambogic acid administration. Histological and immunohistochemical 
evaluation of treated rats revealed normal joint structures with complete 
abrogation of the inflammatory infiltrate and cellular proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that gambogic acid has significant 
anti-inflammatory properties and can possibly constitute a prototype 
anti-inflammatory drug with therapeutic efficacy in the treatment of 
inflammatory diseases such as RA.
