Preclinical evidence supports targeting the C5a receptor (C5aR) in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). To support ongoing clinical development of an anti-C5aR 
monoclonal antibody, we have investigated for the first time the mechanism of 
action and the pharmacodynamics of a blocking anti-murine C5aR (anti-mC5aR) 
surrogate antibody in mouse collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). First, efficacy 
was demonstrated in a multiple-dose treatment study. Almost complete inhibition 
of clinical disease progression was obtained, including reduced bone and 
cartilage destruction in anti-mC5aR-treated mice. Then, the mechanism of action 
was examined by looking for early effects of anti-mC5aR treatment in single-dose 
treatment studies. We found that 48 h after single-dose treatment with 
anti-mC5aR, the neutrophil and macrophage infiltration into the paws was already 
reduced. In addition, several inflammatory markers, including tumour necrosis 
factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-17A were reduced locally in the paws, 
indicating reduction of local inflammation. Furthermore, dose-setting 
experiments supported a beneficial clinical effect of dosing above the C5aR 
saturation level. In conclusion, these preclinical data demonstrated rapid onset 
effects of antibody blockade of C5aR. The data have translational value in 
supporting the Novo Nordisk clinical trials of an anti-C5aR antibody in 
rheumatoid arthritis patients, by identifying potential biomarkers of treatment 
effects as well as by providing information on pharmacodynamics and novel 
insights into the mechanism of action of monoclonal antibody blockade of C5aR.
