OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of Tetramethyl pyrazine (TMP) on the cytokines 
and inflammatory mediators in the serum and the synovial fluid of 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA)rats, and further to investigate its possible 
mechanisms for treating rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Type II CIA rat model was established. Rats in the TMP group were 
administered with TMP at 50 mg/kg and 100 mg/kg, once daily. Dexamethasone at 
2.0 mg/kg was intramuscularly injected to those in the Dexamethasone treated 
group, once daily. Normal saline at 2 mL/kg was given to those in the normal 
control group and the model group, once daily. All medication was started from 
the 7th day, lasting to the 35th day. CIA rats' foot swelling degree was 
observed. Contents of serum IL-1, IL-6, IL-2, NO and PGE2in the synovial fluid 
were detected by radioimmunoassay and nitrate reduction method.
RESULTS: Compared with the normal group, the foot swelling obviously increased, 
contents of NO and PGE2 in the synovial fluid were obviously elevated in the 
model group (P < 0.01). Compared with the model group, the foot swelling could 
be obviously inhibited by 100 mg/kg TMP and Dexamethasone; serum levels of IL-1 
and IL-6 obviously decreased, serum IL-2 level obviously increased, contents of 
NO and PGE, decreased (P < 0.01). TMP 50 mg/kg could obviously inhibit the foot 
swelling of CIA rats (P < 0.01). There was no statistical difference in other 
indices (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: TMP at 100 mg/kg showed obvious inhibition on CIA rats. Its 
inhibitory effect might be correlated to inhibiting activities of endogenous 
cytokines and the generation of inflammatory mediators in inflammation local 
regions, improving contents of anti-inflammation cytokines, and inducing the 
balance of the inflammatory cytokine network.
