OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is one of the most frequent inflammatory 
diseases, causing pain and disability in the affected joints. Early diagnosis is 
essential for the efficiency of symptom-targeting treatments, but its diagnosis 
requires careful clinical, serologic, and imaging examinations, such as magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), which is both expensive and time consuming. In an 
effort to provide the biomedical community with a more accessible way to assess 
the advancement of arthritis, this study sought to investigate the use of 
multispectral optoacoustic tomography (MSOT) in a murine arthritis model, to 
visualize the extent of inflammation in vivo through an 
L-selectin/P-selectin-targeting contrast agent.
METHODS: Mice with collagen-induced arthritis were studied as a model of RA. 
MSOT was performed using an L-selectin/P-selectin-targeting contrast agent, 
polyanionic dendritic polyglycerol sulfate (dPGS) labeled with a near-infrared 
(NIR) fluorophore, to increase the contrast of the arthritic joint. The signal 
intensity ratios between healthy legs and arthritic legs were calculated. 
Findings on contrast-enhanced MRI, clinical observations, the 
lymphocyte:granulocyte ratio, and histologic findings served as referents for 
comparison.
RESULTS: MSOT using an inflammation-targeting contrast agent, dPGS-NIR, allowed 
for accurate diagnosis of inflammation in the mouse joints. In addition, use of 
this technique resulted in significant differentiation of the inflamed joints 
from the healthy joints (P = 0.023). The observed advancement of arthritis on 
the MSOT images was confirmed by clinical observation, blood analysis, 
contrast-enhanced MRI, and ex vivo histologic examinations.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that the combination of an 
inflammation-targeting contrast agent and optoacoustic tomographic imaging 
presents a promising means for the diagnosis of RA and the staging of 
arthritis-related inflammation.
