Etanercept is a widespread biological drug for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis, which inhibits tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). Recently, the 
presence of antibodies targeting TNF-α inhibitors such as infliximab and 
adalimumab, was reported. However, few reports have studied etanercept in a 
mouse model of arthritis. We investigated the induction of anti-etanercept 
antibody production, along with the antibody's potential interfering effects on 
the biological function of etanercept, in mice with collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA). CIA mice received an intraperitoneal injection of etanercept (25, 100 or 
400 µg per mouse). The degree of inflammation and cartilage erosion was 
evaluated, and the number of osteoclasts in the ankle joints was assessed by 
TRAP staining. The level of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the serum was 
measured. To analyze the anti-osteoporotic effect of etanercept, microfocal 
computed tomography analyses of femurs and tibias were performed. Etanercept 
treatment decreased both the incidence and severity of arthritis in a 
dose-dependent manner, except for the highest dose of 400 µg. The mice that were 
treated with 25 and 100 µg etanercept showed an improvement in inflammation, 
cartilage damage, and even bone loss. However, mice treated with 400 µg 
etanercept showed no significant improvement in any of the tested parameters. 
Using a customized enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), the presence of 
the anti-etanercept antibody was detected in the serum in this 
treatment-refractory group. The therapeutic effect of etanercept was reduced in 
the CIA mice that developed the anti-etanercept antibody. In conclusion, the 
production of an anti-etanercept antibody can be induced in CIA mice, and this 
antibody can considerably reduce the anti-arthritic and anti-osteoporotic 
effects of etanercept.
