Alzheimer's disease has long been associated with increased inflammation in the 
brain. Activated microglia and increased production of the inflammatory 
cytokines such as TNF-α, have been proposed to contribute to the onset and 
progression of the disease. We investigated if systemic administration of an 
anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) biologic medication clinically validated for 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), TNF receptor 2 fused to a Fc domain (TNFR2:Fc), could 
ameliorate the behavioral symptoms and decrease neuroinflammation in a 
non-transgenic mouse model mimicking some hallmarks of the disease. Seven days 
after a single intracebroventricular (icv) injection of aggregated amyloid 
beta25-35 (9nmoles), mice displayed significant cognitive deficit in spontaneous 
alternation (working memory) and inhibitory avoidance (long-term memory) tasks. 
Alternation percentage decreased from 72.4%±1.3 to chance level (52.6%±1.7); 
step-through retention latency decreased from 247s to 144s. Subcutaneous 
administration of 30mg/kg TNFR2:Fc every second day post amyloid beta25-35 icv 
administration counteracted the amyloid-induced decrease in alternation 
percentage (66.4s±1.8) and the decreased step-through retention latency 
(248s±9). Measurement of hippocampal TNF-α levels by ELISA after behavioral 
assessment showed significant elevation in animals injected with amyloid 
beta25-35 relative to animals injected with control peptide. In animals treated 
with 30mg/kg TNFR2:Fc, TNF-α levels in the hippocampus were reduced and were 
similar to control animals. These data suggest that peripheral administration of 
TNFR2:Fc counteracts amyloid-induced memory impairment and normalizes increased 
TNF-α levels in hippocampus of a non-transgenic mouse model of amyloid induced 
cognitive deficit.
