The cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway can inhibit the inflammation of 
collagen induced arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 
However, the immunologic mechanisms that provide a therapeutic effect against 
the auto-inflammatory disease are not yet elucidated. The present study explores 
the effect of cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway on CD4+ T cell responses in 
CIA. Forty DBA/1 mice were divided into 4 groups: a control group, a CIA group, 
a vagotomy group, and a nicotine group. The degree of arthritis was measured by 
arthritis score and hematoxylin and eosin. ELISA was used to detect the serum 
concentration of IFN-γ, IL-4 and IL-17A. Flow cytometry was used to detect the 
cytokines and transcription factors (TFs) (the TFs of Th1, Th2, and Th17 cells 
are T-bet, RORγτ and GATA3 respectively) in the spleen. Immunohistochemistry was 
used to analyze RORγτ expression in the joint synovium. Arthritis in the 
nicotine group was significantly lightened compared with that in the CIA group 
and in the vagotomy group. Nicotine attenuated Th17 lineage by reducing IL-17A 
production and RORγτ expression. The expressions of IL-4 and GATA3 were 
increased in the same setting. However, the expressions of IFN-γ and T-bet had 
no difference between the nicotine and the CIA group. Nicotine may induce a 
shift to the Th2 lineage and improve the Th1/Th2 imbalance. Activating the 
cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway with nicotine can inhibit Th17 cell 
responses and may improve the Th1/Th2 imbalance in CIA, providing a new 
justification for its application in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
