Ipomoea stolonifera (I. stolonifera) has been used for the treatment of 
inflammatory diseases including rheumatism and rheumatoid arthritis in Chinese 
traditional medicine. However, the anti-inflammatory activity of I. stolonifera 
has not been elucidated. For this reason, the anti-inflammatory activity of 
n-butanol extract of I. stolonifera (BE-IS) was evaluated in vivo by using acute 
models (croton oil-induced mouse ear edema, carrageenan-induced rat paw edema, 
and carrageenan-induced rat pleurisy) and chronic models (cotton pellet-induced 
rat granuloma, and complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA)-induced rat arthritis). 
Results indicated that oral administration of BE-IS significantly attenuated 
croton oil-induced ear edema, decreased carrageenan-induced paw edema, reduced 
carrageenan-induced exudates and cellular migration, inhibited cotton 
pellet-induced granuloma formation and improved CFA-induced arthritis. 
Preliminary mechanism studies demonstrated that BE-IS decreased the levels of 
myeloperoxidase (MPO) and malondialdehyde (MDA), increased the activity of 
anti-oxidant enzyme superoxide dismutase (SOD) in vivo, and reduced the 
production of nitric oxide (NO), prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), tumor necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α), interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-6 in lipopolysaccharide-activated 
RAW264.7 macrophages in vitro. Results obtained in vivo and in vitro demonstrate 
that BE-IS has considerable anti-inflammatory potential, which provided 
experimental evidences for the traditional application of Ipomoea stolonifera in 
inflammatory diseases.
