One of the main complications of haemophilia A is haemophilic arthropathy (HA), 
a debilitating disease with a significant negative impact on motility and 
quality of life. Despite major advances in the treatment of haemophilia A, many 
patients still suffer from HA. We wish to develop new treatments for HA, but 
must first better understand its causes. Our laboratory studies molecular 
scissors that release the pro-inflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis factor alpha 
(TNFα) from cells. TNFα is considered the 'fire alarm' of the body - it helps to 
fight infections, but can also cause diseases such as inflammatory arthritis. We 
know that the molecular scissors, called TNFα convertase (TACE), and its newly 
discovered regulator termed iRhom2 can be rapidly activated by small amounts of 
cytokines, growth factors, and pro-inflammatory mediators present in the blood. 
We hypothesize that the rapid activation of TACE could help explain one of the 
unsolved mysteries regarding the development of HA, which is how even small 
amounts of blood can provoke a persistent inflammatory response. We propose that 
once blood enters the joint, iRhom2 and TACE are activated to release TNFα and 
that this could promote the development of HA in a similar manner to that in 
which it promotes rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We are currently using immune cells 
stimulated with blood degradation products, and mouse models of HA, to test this 
hypothesis. If successful, our study could provide the rationale for testing 
anti-TNF antibodies, which are already used to treat RA, for the treatment of 
HA. In addition, they might uncover iRhom2 and TACE as attractive new candidate 
targets for the treatment of HA.
