Asthma is a chronic airway inflammatory disease characterized by intense 
leukocyte and eosinophilic infiltration accompanied by mucus hypersecretion and 
tissue hyperresponsiveness. Recent evidence suggests that T-helper (Th)2 cells 
and their cytokine products orchestrate the pathology of asthma. In addition, 
Th17 cells are implicated in the pathogenesis of antigen-induced airway 
inflammation. The Th17 related cytokine interleukin (IL)-23 plays important 
roles in many immunological diseases, such as experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and inflammatory bowel 
disease. Several reports describe the role of IL-23 in the pathogenesis of 
allergic asthma in both human and mice. IL-23 leads to neutrophil infiltration 
in the airway of asthmatic mice, which is characteristic of severe asthma 
resulting from Th17 development and subsequently IL-17 secretion. IL-23 can also 
promote eosinophil infiltration in the airway, which is a hallmark of allergic 
asthma. These studies suggest that IL-23 could be a promoting factor in the 
development of allergic asthma and likewise would be a target for asthma 
therapy. In support of this view, trials of anti-IL-23 therapy have been 
attempted in human and mouse asthma models with encouraging outcomes. This 
review presents the role of IL-23 in asthma according to recent clinical trials 
and animal model studies. The proposed mechanisms of IL-23-induced airway 
inflammation and the agents currently being tested that target IL-23 related 
pathways are discussed.
