BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Annexin A1 (AnxA1) is an endogenous anti-inflammatory 
protein and agonist of the formyl peptide receptor 2 (FPR2). However, the 
potential for therapeutic FPR ligands to modify immune-mediated disease has been 
little explored. We investigated the effects of a synthetic FPR agonist on joint 
disease in the K/BxN model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and RA fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (FLS).
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Arthritis was induced by injection of K/BxN serum at day 
0 and 2 in wild-type (WT) or AnxA1(-/-) mice and clinical and histopathological 
manifestations measured 8-11 days later. WT mice were given the FPR agonist 
compound 43 (Cpd43) (6 or 30 mg·kg(-1) i.p.) for 4 days. Effects of AnxA1 and 
Cpd43 on RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis were assessed in RAW 264.7 cells and 
human RA FLS and macrophages.
KEY RESULTS: Treatment with Cpd43 before or after the onset of arthritis reduced 
clinical disease severity and attenuated synovial TNF-α and 
osteoclast-associated gene expression. Deletion of AnxA1 in mice exacerbated 
arthritis severity in the K/BxN model. In vitro, Cpd43 suppressed 
osteoclastogenesis and NFAT activity elicited by RANKL, and inhibited IL-6 
secretion by mouse macrophages. In human RA joint-derived FLS and 
monocyte-derived macrophages, Cpd43 treatment inhibited IL-6 release, while 
blocking FPR2 or silencing AnxA1 increased this release.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: The FPR agonist Cpd43 reduced osteoclastogenesis 
and inflammation in a mouse model of RA and exhibited anti-inflammatory effects 
in relevant human cells. These data suggest that FPR ligands may represent novel 
therapeutic agents capable of ameliorating inflammation and bone damage in RA.
