Cichoric acid extract (CAE) from Echinacea purpurea L. was used to investigate 
the anti-arthritic effect by using collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rat model. 
The hind paw swelling volume and the body weight were measured and recorded. All 
the drug solutions were administered orally to rats for a total of 28 days. On 
day 28, the rats were anaesthetized and decapitated. The thymus and spleen were 
weighed for the determination of the organ index. The concentration of tumor 
necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β) and prostaglandin E2 
(PGE-2) in the serum was measured using commercially available ELISA kits. Total 
and phosphor-NF-κB and Cox-2 protein expression in synovial tissues were 
determined by histological slides quantification and western blot analysis. Our 
data showed that administration of all doses of CAE (8, 16, and 32 mg/kg) 
significantly decreased the paw swelling, restored body weight gain and 
decreased the organ index of the thymus and spleen compared with that of the CIA 
group. CAE (8, 16, and 32 mg/kg) treatment significantly reduced the levels of 
TNFα, IL-1β and PGE-2 in serum compared with the CIA group. Histopathological 
analysis demonstrated that CAE has obvious anti-arthritic activity. In addition, 
CAE (32 mg/kg) significantly decreased the levels of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), 
TNFα and cyclooxygenase 2 (Cox-2) in synovium tissues of the ankle joint 
compared with the CIA group. Furthermore, CAE administration significantly 
decreased the protein expression of phosphor-NF-κB and Cox-2 in synovium tissues 
of the knee joint compared with the CIA group. The results suggest that the 
anti-inflammatory activity of CAE may account for its anti-arthritic effect, and 
CAE could be a potential therapeutic drug for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA).
