BACKGROUND: The DA rat strain is particularly susceptible to the induction of a 
number of chronic inflammatory diseases, such as models for rheumatoid arthritis 
and multiple sclerosis. Here we sequenced the genomes of two DA sub-strains and 
two disease resistant strains, E3 and PVG, previously used together with DA 
strains in genetically segregating crosses.
RESULTS: The data uncovers genomic variations, such as single nucleotide 
variations (SNVs) and copy number variations that underlie phenotypic 
differences between the strains. Comparisons of regional differences between the 
two DA sub-strains identified 8 genomic regions that discriminate between the 
strains that together cover 38 Mbp and harbor 302 genes. We analyzed 10 
fine-mapped quantitative trait loci and our data implicate strong candidates for 
genetic variations that mediate their effects. For example we could identify a 
single SNV candidate in a regulatory region of the gene Il21r, which has been 
associated to differential expression in both rats and human MS patients. In the 
APLEC complex we identified two SNVs in a highly conserved region, which could 
affect the regulation of all APLEC encoded genes and explain the polygenic 
differential expression seen in the complex. Furthermore, the non-synonymous SNV 
modifying aa153 of the Ncf1 protein was confirmed as the sole causative factor.
CONCLUSION: This complete map of genetic differences between the most commonly 
used rat strains in inflammation research constitutes an important reference in 
understanding how genetic variations contribute to the traits of importance for 
inflammatory diseases.
