This study focused on the potential therapeutic effect of baicalin on 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in rats and the underlying mechanisms. The CIA 
rats were injected with baicalin (50, 100, or 200 mg/kg) once daily for 30 days. 
The rats were monitored for clinical severity of arthritis, and joint tissues 
were used for radiographic assessment and histologic examination. We quantified 
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) in experimental 
animals and used Western blots to assess levels of protein abundance, 
phosphorylation, and acetylation of nuclear factor (NF)-κB p65 and sirtuin 1 
(sirt1) protein expression in joint tissues. Human fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
from rheumatoid arthritis (HFLS-RA) were adopted in further mechanistic 
investigations. Baicalin intraperitoneal injection for 30 days dose-dependently 
blocked clinical manifestations of CIA, such as functional impairment and 
swollen red paws. Meanwhile, it alleviated collagen-induced joint inflammation 
injury and inhibited the secretion of TNF-α and IL-1β in both rat synovium and 
HFLS-RA. Further mechanistic investigations revealed that baicalin suppresses 
NF-κB p65 protein expression and phosphorylation in synovial tissue and 
human-derived synoviocytes. Moreover, the acetylation of NF-κB p65 was 
downregulated by baicalin, which negatively correlates with the baicalin-induced 
upregulation of sirt1 expression in the same conditions. The data indicate that 
CIA in rats can be alleviated by baicalin treatment via relieving joint 
inflammation, which is related to the suppression of synovial NF-κB p65 protein 
expression and the elevation of its deacetylation by sirt1.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.
