Cluster of differentiation 4(+) (CD4(+)) effector T-cell subsets [e.g., T-helper 
(Th) 1 and Th17] are implicated in autoimmune and inflammatory disorders such as 
multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, and rheumatoid arthritis. Interleukin (IL)-6 is a 
pleiotropic cytokine that induces Th17 polarization via signaling through the 
membrane-bound transducer glycoprotein 130 (GP130). Previously, we demonstrated 
that n-3 (Ï‰-3) polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) reduce CD4(+) T-cell 
activation and differentiation into pathogenic Th17 cells by 25-30%. Here we 
report that n-3 PUFAs alter the response of CD4(+) T cells to IL-6 in a lipid 
raft membrane-dependent manner. Naive splenic CD4(+) T cells from fat-1 
transgenic mice exhibited 30% lower surface expression of the IL-6 receptor. 
This membrane-bound receptor is known to be shed during cellular activation, but 
the release of soluble IL-6 receptor after treatment with anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 
was not changed in the CD4(+) T cells from fat-1 mice, suggesting that the 
decrease in surface expression was not due to ectodomain release. We observed a 
significant 20% decrease in the association of GP130 with lipid rafts in 
activated fat-1 CD4(+) T cells and a 35% reduction in GP130 homodimerization, an 
obligate requirement for downstream signaling. The phosphorylation of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), a downstream target of 
IL-6-dependent signaling, was also decreased by 30% in response to exogenous 
IL-6 in fat-1 CD4(+) T cells. Our results suggest that n-3 PUFAs suppress Th17 
cell differentiation in part by reducing membrane raft-dependent responsiveness 
to IL-6, an essential polarizing cytokine.
