The aim of the present study was to explore the feasibility of enhancing green 
fluorescent protein (EGFP) gene transfection into the synovial joint tissues of 
rats with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by ultrasound-mediated microbubble 
destruction. An optimal SonoVue dose was determined using 40 normal rats 
categorized into five groups according to the various doses of microbubbles 
used. At 1 week after ultrasound irradiation, the rats were sacrificed. Damage 
to the joint synovial tissues was observed with hematoxylin and eosin 
histopathological staining under a microscope. A further 44 normal rats were 
used to establish a rat model of RA, and were then categorized into four groups: 
EGFP, ultrasound + EGFP, microbubbles + EGFP and ultrasound + microbubbles + 
EGFP. The last group was irradiated with ultrasound for 10 min following the 
injection of 300 μl SonoVue and 10 μg EGFP into the joint cavity. Rats were 
sacrificed after 3 days and synovial tissue was collected from the knee joints 
for observation of EGFP with fluorescence microscopy and analysis by 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction. EGFP expression was observed in the 
synovial tissues of all groups. However, high EGFP expression levels were 
observed in the ultrasound + microbubbles + EGFP group. No statistically 
significant differences (P>0.05) were observed in the EGFP expression levels 
between the EGFP, ultrasound + EGFP and microbubbles + EGFP groups. However, 
EGFP expression levels in the EGFP, ultrasound + EGFP and microbubbles + EGFP 
groups significantly differed (P<0.05) from that in the ultrasound + 
microbubbles + EGFP group. Therefore, ultrasound-mediated microbubble 
destruction improved EGFP transfection efficiency into the joint synovial 
tissues of rats with RA.
