OBJECTIVE: To examine whether the citrullinated chemokines epithelial 
neutrophil-activating peptide 78 (ENA-78)/CXCL5, macrophage inflammatory protein 
1Î±/CCL3, and monocyte chemotactic protein 1/CCL2 are detected in the biologic 
fluid of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and if so, to determine the 
biologic activities of these chemokines.
METHODS: Recombinant human chemokines were citrullinated by peptidylarginine 
deiminase. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays were performed to measure the 
concentrations of citrullinated chemokines in sera from patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and normal individuals and in synovial fluid from patients with 
RA, patients with osteoarthritis (OA), and patients with other inflammatory 
rheumatic diseases. The correlation between the citrullinated chemokine levels 
and clinical data was analyzed. Monocyte and neutrophil chemotaxis assays were 
performed, and native (noncitrullinated) or citrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5 was 
injected into mouse knees to evaluate the biologic activities of these 
chemokines.
RESULTS: The concentration of citrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5 was significantly 
higher in RA sera and SF than in normal sera and in SF from patients with other 
rheumatic diseases including OA. In RA SF, a strong correlation between the 
amount of citrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5 and the C-reactive protein level or the 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate was observed. Citrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5 induced 
monocyte chemotaxis via CXCR1 and CXCR2, while noncitrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5 did 
not. In a mouse model of inflammatory arthritis, citrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5 
induced more severe inflammation and recruited more monocytes than did 
noncitrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5.
CONCLUSION: Citrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5 is highly correlated with RA disease 
activity and, unlike noncitrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5, recruits monocytes. These 
results indicate that citrullinated ENA-78/CXCL5 may exert previously 
unrecognized inflammatory properties in RA by recruiting monocytes to inflamed 
joint tissue.
