OBJECTIVE: To observe the seasonal changes in serum levels of interleukin-1 beta 
(IL-1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and melatonin (MT) in Bizheng rat model, and 
explore the relationship between MT and the pathogenesis of rheumatoid 
arthritis.
METHODS: One hundred and sixty Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into 
four groups in summer (n=80) and winter (n=80) respectively: normal group, 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model group, operation group, and 
sham-operation group (n=20 in each group). The CIA model group was injected with 
collagen emulsion at the base of the tail to induce arthritis. The rats in the 
operation group received pineal gland resection, and 7 days after the first 
operation, underwent testectomy or oophorectomy. The rats in the sham-operation 
group were operated to ligature the sagittal sinus, without extracting the 
pineal gland. After the operations, the operation group and the sham-operation 
group both were immunized as the CIA group was. The serum levels of IL-1β, IL-6 
and MT in different groups were measured by radioimmunoassay.
RESULTS: Compared with the normal group, the serum levels of IL-1β and IL-6 
increased in the CIA model, operation, and sham-operation groups both in summer 
and in winter (IL-1β in summer, P=0.008, P<0.01, P=0.012; IL-1β in winter, 
P=0.019, P<0.01, P=0.027; IL-6 in summer, P=0.028, P<0.01, P=0.024; IL-6 in 
winter, P=0.006, P<0.01, P=0.008). In the operation group, the serum levels of 
IL-1β and IL-6 in winter were higher than in summer, but with no statistically 
significant differences (P=0.844, 0.679). Compared with the normal group, the 
serum level of MT significantly increased in summer and winter in both the CIA 
model group (P=0.002, 0.008) and the sham-operation group (P=0.003, 0.007), 
while significantly decreased in the operation group (P=0.023, 0.003). There was 
no significant difference in MT level in the operation group between summer and 
winter (P=0.947).
CONCLUSIONS: The increase of serum levels of IL-1β and IL-6 may exacerbate the 
inflammatory reaction and cause a more severe condition in the rheumatoid 
arthritis. The concentrations of IL-1β, IL-6, and MT correspond with the change 
of seasons, confirming that there are connections between nature and human body.
