OBJECTIVE: Pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) expressed 
in capsaicin-sensitive sensory neurons and immune cells has divergent functions 
in inflammatory and pain processes. This study was undertaken to investigate the 
involvement of PACAP in a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in PACAP(-/-) and wild-type (PACAP(+/+) ) mice by 
K/BxN serum transfer. General features of the disease were investigated by 
semiquantitative scoring, plethysmometry, and histopathologic analysis. Mechano- 
and thermonociceptive thresholds and motor functions were also evaluated. 
Metabolic activity was assessed by positron emission tomography. Bone morphology 
was measured by in vivo micro-computed tomography, myeloperoxidase activity and 
superoxide production by bioluminescence imaging with luminol and lucigenin, 
respectively, and vascular permeability by fluorescent indocyanine green dye 
study.
RESULTS: PACAP(+/+) mice developed notable joint swelling, reduced grasping 
ability, and mechanical (but not thermal) hyperalgesia after K/BxN serum 
transfer. In PACAP(-/-) mice clinical scores and edema were significantly 
reduced, and mechanical hyperalgesia and motor impairment were absent, 
throughout the 2-week period of observation. Metabolic activity and superoxide 
production increased in the tibiotarsal joints of wild-type mice but were 
significantly lower in PACAP(-/-) animals. Myeloperoxidase activity in the ankle 
joints of PACAP(-/-) mice was significantly reduced in the early phase of 
arthritis, but increased in the late phase. Synovial hyperplasia was also 
significantly increased, and progressive bone spur formation was observed in 
PACAP-deficient mice only.
CONCLUSION: In PACAP-deficient mice with serum-transfer arthritis, joint 
swelling, vascular leakage, hyperalgesia, and early inflammatory cell 
accumulation are reduced; in the later phase of the disease, immune cell 
function and bone neoformation are increased. Elucidation of the underlying 
pathways of PACAP activity may open promising new avenues for development of 
therapy in inflammatory arthritis.

Â© 2014 The Authors. Arthritis & Rheumatology is published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc. on behalf of the American College of Rheumatology.
