INTRODUCTION: The inflammatory reflex is a physiological mechanism through which 
the nervous system maintains immunologic homeostasis by modulating innate and 
adaptive immunity. We postulated that the reflex might be harnessed 
therapeutically to reduce pathological levels of inflammation in rheumatoid 
arthritis by activating its prototypical efferent arm, termed the cholinergic 
anti-inflammatory pathway. To explore this, we determined whether electrical 
neurostimulation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway reduced disease 
severity in the collagen-induced arthritis model.
METHODS: Rats implanted with vagus nerve cuff electrodes had collagen-induced 
arthritis induced and were followed for 15 days. Animals underwent active or 
sham electrical stimulation once daily from day 9 through the conclusion of the 
study. Joint swelling, histology, and levels of cytokines and bone metabolism 
mediators were assessed.
RESULTS: Compared with sham treatment, active neurostimulation of the 
cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway resulted in a 52% reduction in ankle 
diameter (p = 0.02), a 57% reduction in ankle diameter (area under curve; 
p = 0.02) and 46% reduction overall histological arthritis score (p = 0.01) with 
significant improvements in inflammation, pannus formation, cartilage 
destruction, and bone erosion (p = 0.02), accompanied by numerical reductions in 
systemic cytokine levels, not reaching statistical significance. Bone erosion 
improvement was associated with a decrease in serum levels of receptor activator 
of NF-κB ligand (RANKL) from 132±13 to 6±2 pg/mL (mean±SEM, p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The severity of collagen-induced arthritis is reduced by 
neurostimulation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway delivered using an 
implanted electrical vagus nerve stimulation cuff electrode, and supports the 
rationale for testing this approach in human inflammatory disorders.
