OBJECTIVE: The chemokine receptor CXCR6 is highly expressed on lymphocytes 
isolated from the synovium of patients with rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic 
arthritis, or juvenile idiopathic arthritis, suggesting that CXCR6 regulates 
immune cell activation or infiltration into arthritic joints. This study was 
undertaken to examine the role of CXCR6 in T cell activation and arthritis 
development.
METHODS: A collagen-induced arthritis model was used to examine arthritis 
development in wild-type and CXCR6(-/-) mice. CXCR6 expression, lymphocyte 
accumulation, and intracellular cytokine production were examined by flow 
cytometry. Collagen-specific antibodies were measured in the serum. 
Collagen-specific recall responses were examined in vitro via proliferation and 
cytokine release assays. T cell homing to inflamed joints was examined using 
competitive adoptive transfer of dye-labeled lymphocytes from wild-type and 
CXCR6(-/-) mice.
RESULTS: The numbers of CXCR6+ T cells were increased in the paws and draining 
lymph nodes of arthritic mice. The incidence of arthritis, disease severity, 
extent of T cell accumulation, and levels of collagen-specific IgG2a antibodies 
were significantly reduced in CXCR6(-/-) mice compared to wild-type mice. T 
cells from wild-type mice exhibited Th1 (interferon-γ [IFNγ]) polarization in 
the inguinal lymph nodes following immunization. At disease peak, this shifted 
to a Th17 (interleukin-17A [IL-17A]) response in the popliteal lymph nodes. T 
cells in CXCR6(-/-) mice exhibited impaired cytokine polarization, resulting in 
a decreased frequency and number of IL-17A- and IFNγ-producing cells. 
Recruitment of activated CXCR6(-/-) mouse T cells to the inflamed paws was 
impaired compared to recruitment of wild-type mouse T cells.
CONCLUSION: These experiments demonstrate that CXCR6 plays important roles in 
the pathogenesis of arthritis through its effects on both T cell cytokine 
polarization and homing of T cells to inflamed joints.
