OBJECTIVE: SH3BP2 is a signaling adapter protein which regulates immune and 
skeletal systems. Gain-of-function mutations in SH3BP2 cause cherubism, 
characterized by jawbone destruction. This study was aimed to examine the role 
of SH3BP2 in inflammatory bone loss using a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
model.
METHODS: CIA was induced in wild-type (Sh3bp2(+/+)) and heterozygous P416R 
SH3BP2 cherubism mutant knock-in (Sh3bp2(KI/+)) mice, an SH3BP2 gain-of-function 
model. Severity of the arthritis was determined by assessing the paw swelling 
and histological analyses of the joints. Micro-CT analysis was used to determine 
the levels of bone loss. Inflammation and osteoclastogenesis in the joints were 
evaluated by quantitating the gene expression of inflammatory cytokines and 
osteoclast markers. Furthermore, involvement of the T- and B-cell responses was 
determined by draining lymph node cell culture and measurement of the serum 
anti-mouse type II collagen antibody levels, respectively. Finally, roles of the 
SH3BP2 mutation in macrophage activation and osteoclastogenesis were determined 
by evaluating the TNF-α production levels and osteoclast formation in bone 
marrow-derived M-CSF-dependent macrophage (BMM) cultures.
RESULTS: Sh3bp2(KI/+) mice exhibited more severe inflammation and bone loss, 
accompanying an increased number of osteoclasts. The mRNA levels for TNF-α and 
osteoclast marker genes were higher in the joints of Sh3bp2(KI/+) mice. Lymph 
node cell culture showed that lymphocyte proliferation and IFN-γ and IL-17 
production were comparable between Sh3bp2(+/+) and Sh3bp2(KI/+) cells. Serum 
anti-type II collagen antibody levels were comparable between Sh3bp2(+/+) and 
Sh3bp2(KI/+) mice. In vitro experiments showed that TNF-α production in 
Sh3bp2(KI/+) BMMs is elevated compared with Sh3bp2(+/+) BMMs and that 
RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis is enhanced in Sh3bp2(KI/+) BMMs associated 
with increased NFATc1 nuclear localization.
CONCLUSION: Gain-of-function of SH3BP2 augments inflammation and bone loss in 
the CIA model through increased macrophage activation and osteoclast formation. 
Therefore, modulation of the SH3BP2 expression may have therapeutic potential 
for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
