Peptidyl arginine deiminase (PAD)4 is a nuclear enzyme that catalyzes the 
posttranslational conversion of arginine residues to citrulline. 
Posttranslational protein citrullination has been implicated in several 
inflammatory autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, colitis, and 
multiple sclerosis. Here, we tested the hypothesis that PAD4 contributes to 
ischemic acute kidney injury (AKI) by exacerbating the inflammatory response 
after renal ischemia-reperfusion (I/R). Renal I/R injury in mice increased PAD4 
activity as well as PAD4 expression in the mouse kidney. After 30 min of renal 
I/R, vehicle-treated mice developed severe AKI with large increases in plasma 
creatinine. In contrast, mice pretreated with PAD4 inhibitors (2-chloroamidine 
or streptonigrin) had significantly reduced renal I/R injury. Further supporting 
a critical role for PAD4 in generating ischemic AKI, mice pretreated with 
recombinant human PAD4 (rPAD4) protein and subjected to mild (20 min) renal I/R 
developed exacerbated ischemic AKI. Consistent with the hypothesis that PAD4 
regulates renal tubular inflammation after I/R, mice treated with a PAD4 
inhibitor had significantly reduced renal neutrophil chemotactic cytokine 
(macrophage inflammatory protein-2 and keratinocyte-derived cytokine) expression 
and had decreased neutrophil infiltration. Furthermore, mice treated with rPAD4 
had significantly increased renal tubular macrophage inflammatory protein-2 and 
keratinocyte-derived cytokine expression as well as increased neutrophil 
infiltration and necrosis. Finally, cultured mouse kidney proximal tubules 
treated with rPAD4 had significantly increased proinflammatory chemokine 
expression compared with vehicle-treated cells. Taken together, our results 
suggest that PAD4 plays a critical role in renal I/R injury by increasing renal 
tubular inflammatory responses and neutrophil infiltration after renal I/R.
