OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex and multifactorial 
autoimmune disease with striking clinical, immunologic, and genetic 
heterogeneity, despite nearly ubiquitous antinuclear antibody (ANA) production. 
Multiple gene polymorphisms have been associated with the disease, but these 
individually account for only a very small percentage of overall SLE risk. In 
earlier studies, constitutive expression of the DNA-binding protein 
AT-rich-interactive domain 3A (ARID3a) in transgenic mouse B lymphocyte lineage 
cells led to spontaneous ANA production and preferential development of B cells 
associated with production of polyreactive antibodies. Therefore, we undertook 
this study to determine whether ARID3a was overexpressed in B lymphocytes of SLE 
patients and whether ARID3a expression was associated with disease severity.
METHODS: A cross-section of SLE patients, rheumatoid arthritis patients, and 
age- and sex-matched controls was analyzed longitudinally for lupus disease 
activity, numbers of ARID3a+ peripheral blood mononuclear B cells from multiple 
B cell subsets, and immunoglobulin and cytokine levels.
RESULTS: Fifty of 115 SLE patients (43%) had dramatically increased numbers of 
ARID3a+ B cells compared to healthy controls. ARID3a was not expressed in naive 
B cells of healthy controls, but was abundant in these precursors of 
antibody-secreting cells in SLE patients. Total numbers of ARID3a+ B cells 
correlated with increased disease activity as defined by SLE Disease Activity 
Index scores in individuals assessed at 3 time points.
CONCLUSION: These findings identify B cell anomalies in SLE that allow 
stratification of patient samples based on ARID3a expression and implicate 
ARID3a as a potential marker of CD19+ B lymphocytes correlated with disease 
activity.
