Sanmiao formula (SM) is a basic prescription for the treatment of gouty and 
rheumatoid arthritis that has been used in China over a long period of history. 
However, there is no evidence associating SM with the treatment of 
osteoarthritis (OA). In this study, a characterization of the anti-OA effect of 
SM was conducted using an in vivo rat model induced by anterior cruciate 
ligament transection and medial meniscus resection (ACLT plus MMx), together 
with in vitro studies using chondrocytes for further molecular characterization. 
Rats subjected to ACLT plus MMx were treated with SM at doses of 0.63, 1.25 and 
2.5 g/kg per day for three or six weeks. SM treatment significantly inhibited 
the histopathological changes of articular cartilage damage and synovial 
inflammation in the rats following ACLT plus MMx. SM (2.5 g/kg) clearly 
inhibited chondrocyte apoptosis and prevented cartilage matrix degradation, 
which was indicated by the increased proteoglycan and collagen content, 
particularly with regard to type II collagen expression in articular cartilage. 
Furthermore, SM (2.5 g/kg) markedly inhibited the release of interleukin 
(IL)-1β, tumor necrosis factor-α and nitric oxide in serum, while simultaneously 
increasing the levels of bone morphogenetic protein-2 and transforming growth 
factor-β in the circulation. Notably, SM (2.5 g/kg) clearly attenuated the 
OA-augmented expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-13 and augmented the 
OA-reduced expression of tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase (TIMP)-1 in the 
knee joints. In addition, SM significantly reduced the proportion of early and 
late apoptotic and sub-G1 phase cells, and clearly decreased the expression of 
MMP-13 and increased that of TIMP-1 at the mRNA and protein levels in 
IL-1β-induced chondrocytes. These findings provide the first evidence that SM 
effectively treats OA by inhibiting chondrocyte apoptosis, cartilage matrix 
degradation and the inflammatory response.
