Our aim was to examine the impact of TLR5 ligation in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 
and experimental arthritis pathology. Studies were conducted to investigate the 
role of TLR5 ligation on RA and mouse myeloid cell chemotaxis or osteoclast 
formation, and in addition, to uncover the significance of TNF-α function in 
TLR5-mediated pathogenesis. Next, the in vivo mechanism of action was determined 
in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and local joint TLR5 ligation models. Last, 
to evaluate the importance of TLR5 function in RA, we used anti-TLR5 Ab therapy 
in CIA mice. We show that TLR5 agonist, flagellin, can promote monocyte 
infiltration and osteoclast maturation directly through myeloid TLR5 ligation 
and indirectly via TNF-α production from RA and mouse cells. These two 
identified TLR5 functions are potentiated by TNF-α, because inhibition of both 
pathways can more strongly impair RA synovial fluid-driven monocyte migration 
and osteoclast differentiation compared with each factor alone. In preclinical 
studies, flagellin postonset treatment in CIA and local TLR5 ligation in vivo 
provoke homing and osteoclastic development of myeloid cells, which are 
associated with the TNF-α cascade. Conversely, CIA joint inflammation and bone 
erosion are alleviated when TLR5 function is blocked. We found that TLR5 and 
TNF-α pathways are interconnected, because TNF-α is produced by TLR5 ligation in 
RA myeloid cells, and anti-TNF-α therapy can markedly suppress TLR5 expression 
in RA monocytes. Our novel findings demonstrate that a direct and an indirect 
mechanism are involved in TLR5-driven RA inflammation and bone destruction.
