The lipoxygenase isoform of 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) is reported to be 
overexpressed in human rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue and involved in the 
progress of inflammatory arthritis. However, the detailed mechanism of how 
5-lipoxygenase regulates the inflammatory response in arthritis synovial tissue 
is still unclear. The aim of this study was to investigate the involvement of 
lipoxygenase pathways in TNF-α-induced production of cytokines and chemokines. 
Human synovial fibroblasts from rheumatoid patients were used in this study. 
5-LOX inhibitors and shRNA were used to examine the involvement of 5-LOX in 
TNF-α-induced cytokines and chemokines expression. The signaling pathways were 
examined by Western Blotting or immunofluorescence staining. The effect of 5-LOX 
inhibitor on TNF-α-induced chemokine expression and paw edema was also explored 
in vivo in C57BL/6 mice. Treatment with 5-LOX inhibitors significantly decreased 
TNF-α-induced pro-inflammatory mediators including interleukin-6 (IL-6) and 
monocyte chemo-attractant protein-1 (MCP-1) in human synovial fibroblasts. 
Knockdown of 5-LOX using shRNA exerted similar inhibitory effects. The 
abrogation of NF-κB activation was involved in the antagonizing effects of these 
inhibitors. Furthermore, 5-LOX inhibitor decreased TNF-α-induced up-regulation 
of serum MCP-1 level and paw edema in mouse model. Our results provide the 
evidence that the administration of 5-LOX inhibitors is able to ameliorate 
TNF-α-induced cytokine/chemokine release and paw edema, indicating that 5-LOX 
inhibitors may be developed for therapeutic treatment of inflammatory arthritis.
