Osteoclasts are responsible for physiological bone remodeling as well as 
pathological bone destruction in osteoporosis, periodontitis and rheumatoid 
arthritis, and thus represent a pharmacological target for drug development. We 
aimed to characterize and compare the cytokine-induced osteoclastogenesis of 
bone marrow and spleen precursors. Established protocols used to generate 
osteoclasts from bone marrow were modified to examine osteoclastogenesis of the 
spleen cells of healthy mice. Osteoclast formation was successfully induced from 
spleen precursors using receptor activator of nuclear factor κB ligand 
(50 ng/ml) and macrophage colony stimulating factor (50 ng/ml). Compared to bone 
marrow cultures, differentiation from spleen required a longer cultivation time 
(9 days for spleen, as compared to 5 days for marrow cultures) and a higher 
plating density of non-adherent cells (75,000/cm(2) for spleen, as compared to 
50,000/cm(2) for bone marrow). Osteoclasts generated from spleen precursors 
expressed osteoclast marker genes calcitonin receptor, cathepsin K and matrix 
metalloproteinase 9 and were capable of resorbing hydroxyapatite. The 
differentiation capacity of spleen and bone marrow precursors was comparable for 
BALB/c, C57BL/6 and FVB mice. We also developed and tested a cryopreservation 
protocol for the osteoclast precursors. While 70-80 % of cells were lost during 
the first week of freezing, during the subsequent 5 weeks the losses were within 
2-5 % per week. Osteoclastogenesis from the recovered bone marrow precursors was 
successful up to 5 weeks after freezing. Spleen precursors retained their 
osteoclastogenic capacity for 1 week after freezing, but not thereafter. The 
described protocol is useful for the studies of genetically modified animals as 
well as for screening new osteoclast-targeting therapeutics.
