ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Rhododendri Mollis Flos (RMF), termed as 
Naoyanghua in Chinese, is a traditional anti-rheumatoid arthritis and bruises 
herb with associated cardiotoxicity. The predominant rhodojaponins occurring in 
RMF are responsible for its efficacy and toxicity. The narrow therapeutic window 
of rhodojaponins necessitates monitoring the pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics so as to ensure the safety in practical applications of RMF.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-four male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into a 
control group, a low-dose group and a high-dose group. After oral administration 
of RMF extract, the cardiotoxicity of RMF was evaluated by assessing ventricular 
function and by measuring the plasma levels of LDH, CK-MB and AST. Then, an 
LC-MS method was established to determine the rat plasma concentrations of three 
major rhodojaponins including rhodojaponin I, II and III (R-I, II and III) and 
was applied to pharmacokinetic study. Finally, based on an AUC-weighting 
approach, the integrated pharmacokinetics of three rhodojaponins was determined.
RESULTS: Compared with control group, cardiotoxicity was observed in RMF-treated 
rats with left ventricular dysfunction and with the continuously increased 
levels of LDH and CK-MB in a dose-dependent manner. The pharmacokinetic 
parameters (AUC0-t, AUC0-âˆž, t1/2, Tmax and Cmax) for R-I, II and III were 
markedly different, and the integrated pharmacokinetics was therefore converted 
to describe the holistic pharmacokinetic profiles of R-I, II and III, which 
correlated pretty well with cardiotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: It was found that myocardial damage was elicited by RMF extract in 
a dose-dependent manner and the plasma levels of LDH and CK-MB could reveal the 
severity of myocardial injury as potential markers. This study also highlighted 
the potential of integrated pharmacokinetics to provid a more comprehensive 
understanding of the relationship between the pharmacokinetic behaviors of 
traditional Chinese herbal medicine and its efficacy.
