Several studies have shown that blockade of colony stimulating factor-1 (CSF-1) 
or its receptor (CSF-1R) inhibits disease progression in rodent models of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA); however, the role of the CSF-1/CSF-1R pathway in 
RA-induced pain and functional deficits has not been studied. Thus, we examined 
the effect of chronic intra-articular administration of a monoclonal anti-CSF-1R 
antibody (AFS98) on spontaneous pain, knee edema and functional disabilities in 
mice with arthritis. Unilateral arthritis was produced by multiple injections of 
complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) into the right knee joint of adult male ICR 
mice. CFA-injected mice were then treated twice weekly from day 10 until day 25 
with anti-CSF-1R antibody (3 and 10 μg/5 μL per joint), isotype control (rat IgG 
10 μg/5 μL per joint) or PBS (5 μl/joint). Knee edema, spontaneous flinching, 
vertical rearing and horizontal exploratory activity were assessed at different 
days. Additionally, counts of peripheral leukocytes and body weight were 
measured to evaluate general health status. Intra-articular treatment with 
anti-CSF-1R antibody significantly increased horizontal exploratory activity and 
vertical rearing as well as reduced spontaneous flinching behavior and knee 
edema as compared to CFA-induced arthritis mice treated with PBS. Treatment with 
this antibody neither significantly affect mouse body weight nor the number of 
peripheral leukocytes. These results suggest that blockade of CSF-1R at the 
initial injury site (joint) could represent a therapeutic alternative for 
improving the functional disabilities and attenuating pain and inflammation in 
patients with RA.
