BACKGROUND: Active vitamin D metabolites have been shown to have protective 
effects in experimental arthritis especially when used as preventive treatment. 
However, because the direct effects of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25(OH) 2D3) 
on bone formation and resorption are very complex, the net effect of 1,25(OH)2D3 
on histomorphometric parameters of bone turnover and mineralisation should be 
investigated. Therefore, we examined the influence of 1,25(OH)2D3 therapy on 
arthritis-induced alterations of periarticular and axial bone as well as disease 
activity, inflammation and joint destruction in antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) 
of the rat.
METHODS: AIA was induced in 20 eight-week-old female Wistar rats. 10 rats 
without arthritis were used as healthy controls. AIA rats received 1,25(OH)2D3 
(0.2 μg/kg/day, i.p., n = 10) or vehicle (n = 10) at regular intervals for 28 
consecutive days beginning 3 days before arthritis induction. Bone structure of 
the secondary spongiosa of the periarticular and axial bone was analyzed using 
histomorphometry. Parameters of mineralization were investigated using 
tetracycline labelling. Clinical disease activity, inflammation and joint 
destruction were measured by joint swelling and histological investigation, 
respectively.
RESULTS: AIA led to significant periarticular bone loss. 1,25(OH)2D3 treatment 
resulted in a highly significant increase in trabecular bone volume and bone 
formation rate in comparison to both vehicle-treated AIA and healthy controls at 
periarticular (p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively) and axial bone (p < 0.001 
and p < 0.001, respectively). In addition, bone resorption was reduced by 
1,25(OH)2D3 at the axial bone (p < 0.05 vs. vehicle-treated AIA). Joint swelling 
as well as histological signs of inflammation and joint destruction were not 
influenced by 1,25(OH)2D3.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the study indicate a marked osteoanabolic effect of 
1,25(OH)2D3 presumably due to a substantial increase in mineralization. Thus, 
1,25(OH)2D3 may be an effective osteoanabolic treatment principle to antagonize 
the inflammation-associated suppression of bone formation in rheumatoid 
arthritis.
