Sjögren's syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune disease characterized by lymphocytic 
infiltration of the salivary and lacrimal glands. The aim of the study was to 
characterize and compare the presence of diverse cytokines and regulatory T and 
B cells in lip minor salivary gland (MSG) biopsies from patients with primary 
Sjögren's syndrome (pSS), secondary SS (sSS), and patients with connective 
tissue disease (CTD) without (w/o) SS. We included samples of MSG from 15 pSS, 
24 sSS (six scleroderma, nine rheumatoid arthritis and nine lupus patients) and 
15 patients with CTD w/o SS. Tissues were examined by an indirect 
immunoperoxidase technique (goat polyclonal anti-human IL-19, goat polyclonal 
anti-human IL-22 or mouse monoclonal anti-human IL-24). To determine the 
subpopulation of CD4(+)/IL-17A(+)-, CD4(+)/IL-4(+)-, CD4(+)/IFN-ɣ(+)-expressing 
T cells, CD25(+)/Foxp3(+) Treg cells and CD20(+)/IL-10(+)-producing B cell 
subset, a double-staining procedure was performed. We estimated the mean 
percentage of positively staining cells in two fields per sample. 
CD4(+)/IFN-ɣ(+), CD4(+)/IL-4(+) and IL-22(+) cell percentages were elevated in 
both SS varieties; however, the cells were more prevalent in pSS. Patients with 
pSS had a high number of CD4(+)/IL-17A(+) and IL-19(+) T cells and a lower 
percentage of IL-24(+) cells (P < 0.05). The Treg and IL-10-producing B cells 
were increased in pSS (P < 0.05). Concluding, in our patients, a 
pro-inflammatory and regulatory balance coexists in SS, being both responses 
more intense in pSS. The explanation of these differences may be related to 
disease activity, disease duration and treatment.
