IL-23 is part of the IL-12 family of cytokines and is composed of the p19 
subunit specific to IL-23 and the p40 subunit shared with IL-12. IL-23 
specifically contributes to the inflammatory process of multiple chronic 
inflammatory autoimmune disorders, including psoriasis, multiple sclerosis, 
inflammatory bowel disease, and rheumatoid arthritis. So far, one antibody 
targeting the shared p40 subunit of IL-12 and IL-23, Ustekinumab, is approved 
clinically to treat psoriasis. However, there are no treatments inhibiting 
specifically the IL-23 proinflammatory response. We have developed small 
IL-23R-specific antagonists by designing all D-peptides arising from flexible 
regions of IL-23R. Of these peptides, we selected 2305 (teeeqqly), since in 
addition to its soluble properties, it inhibited IL-23-induced STAT3 
phosphorylation in spleen cells. Peptide 2305 specifically binds to 
IL-23R/IL-12Rβ1-expressing HEK-293 cells and not to cells devoid of the 
receptor. Peptide 2305 showed functional selectivity by modulating IL-23-induced 
gene expression in IL-23R/IL-12Rβ1-expressing cells and in Jurkat cells; 2305 
does not inhibit IL-12-induced cytokine expression in IL-12Rβ-IL-12Rβ2-HEK-293 
cells. Finally, compared with anti-p40 treatment, 2305 effectively and 
selectively inhibits IL-23-induced inflammation in three in vivo mouse models: 
IL-23-induced ear inflammation, anti-CD40-induced systemic inflammatory 
response, and collagen-induced arthritis. We, hereby, describe the discovery and 
characterization of a potent IL-23R small-peptide modulator, 2305 (teeeqqly), 
that is effective in vivo. 2305 may be more convenient, less cumbersome, less 
costly, and most importantly, more specific than current biologics for the 
treatment of inflammatory conditions, and conceivably complement the actual 
therapies for these chronic and debilitating inflammatory diseases.
