BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an auto-immune disease 
afflicting multiple joints of the body, where as a result of the increase in 
inflammatory cytokines and tissue destructive factors such as matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP)-3, deterioration of the bones and cartilages of the 
joints occurs. The present investigation was carried out to study the 
anti-inflammatory activities of light emitting diode (LED) irradiation on hind 
paw inflammation in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mice models.
MATERIALS AND METHOD: RA in the CIA mouse model was induced by immunization of 
DBA/1J mice with intradermal injections of an emulsion of bovine type II 
collagen and complete Freund's adjuvant. A total of 20 CIA mice were subdivided 
into the following groups: control group, CIA group and 2 groups of LED 
irradiated CIA mice (LED groups) (n=5 per group). The mouse knee joint area in 
the LED groups (the 570 nm and 940 nm groups) was irradiated with LED energy, 
three times a week for 500 s per session over 8 weeks at a dose of 5 J/cm(2). 
The hind paw swelling was assessed by the increase in hind paw thickness. The 
serum levels of the inflammatory cytokines and arthritic factor MMP-3 were 
determined with an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: In the LED-570 and LED-940 groups at 4 weeks after arthritis induction, 
the swelling inhibition index was 18.1±4.9 and 29.3±4.0 respectively. 
Interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6 and MMP-3 serum levels were significantly lower in the 
LED-940 group.
CONCLUSIONS: LED irradiation, particularly in the near-infrared was effective 
for inhibition of the inflammatory reactions caused by RA.
