Murine models for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) research can provide important 
insights for understanding RA pathogenesis and evaluating the efficacy of novel 
treatments. However, simultaneously imaging both murine articular cartilage and 
subchondral bone using conventional techniques is challenging because of low 
spatial resolution and poor soft tissue contrast. X-ray phase-contrast imaging 
(XPCI) is a new technique that offers high spatial resolution for the 
visualisation of cartilage and skeletal tissues. The purpose of this study was 
to utilise XPCI to observe articular cartilage and subchondral bone in a 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) murine model and quantitatively assess changes 
in the joint microstructure. XPCI was performed on the two treatment groups (the 
control group and CIA group, n = 9 per group) to monitor the progression of 
damage to the femur from the knee joint in a longitudinal study (at 0, 4 and 8 
weeks after primary injection). For quantitative assessment, morphologic 
parameters were measured in three-dimensional (3D) images using appropriate 
image analysis software. Our results showed that the average femoral cartilage 
volume, surface area and thickness were significantly decreased (P<0.05) in the 
CIA group compared to the control group. Meanwhile, these decreases were 
accompanied by obvious destruction of the surface of subchondral bone and a loss 
of trabecular bone in the CIA group. This study confirms that XPCI technology 
has the ability to qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate microstructural 
changes in mouse joints. This technique has the potential to become a routine 
analysis method for accurately monitoring joint damage and comprehensively 
assessing treatment efficacy.
