The incidence of AA amyloidosis is high in humans with rheumatoid arthritis and 
several animal species, including cats and cattle with prolonged inflammation. 
AA amyloidosis can be experimentally induced in mice using severe inflammatory 
stimuli and a coinjection of AA amyloid; however, difficulties have been 
associated with transmitting AA amyloidosis to a different animal species, and 
this has been attributed to the "species barrier." The interleukin-1 receptor 
antagonist knockout (IL-1raKO) mouse, a rodent model of human rheumatoid 
arthritis, has been used in the transmission of AA amyloid. When IL-1raKO and 
BALB/c mice were intraperitoneally injected with mouse AA amyloid together with 
a subcutaneous pretreatment of 2% AgNO3, all mice from both strains that were 
injected with crude or purified murine AA amyloid developed AA amyloidosis. 
However, the amyloid index, which was determined by the intensity of AA amyloid 
deposition, was significantly higher in IL-1raKO mice than in BALB/c mice. When 
IL-1raKO and BALB/c mice were injected with crude or purified bovine AA amyloid 
together with the pretreatment, 83% (5/6 cases) and 38% (3/8 cases) of IL-1raKO 
mice and 17% (1/6 cases) and 0% (0/6 cases) of BALB/c mice, respectively, 
developed AA amyloidosis. Similarly, when IL-1raKO and BALB/c mice were injected 
with crude or purified feline AA amyloid, 33% (2/6 cases) and 88% (7/8 cases) of 
IL-1raKO mice and 0% (0/6 cases) and 29% (2/6 cases) of BALB/c mice, 
respectively, developed AA amyloidosis. These results indicated that IL-1raKO 
mice are a useful animal model for investigating AA amyloidogenesis.
