Experimental vaccination to induce antibodies (Abs) capable of cytokine 
antagonism shows promise as a novel immunotherapy for chronic inflammatory 
disease. We prepared a hybrid antigen consisting of residues 141-235 of rat 
TNF-α fused to the C-terminus of glutathione-S-transferase (GST), chemically 
modified to incorporate aldehyde residues, for development of an auto-vaccine 
eliciting anti-rTNF-α Abs. In rat immunization the soluble aldehyde-modified 
fusion protein did not generate observable Ab responses. By contrast, 
vaccination with the aldehyde-modified fusion protein adsorbed on alum induced 
anti-TNF-α autoAbs with high titer and neutralizing activity. Induction of 
adjuvant arthritis in rats pre-immunized with unmodified fusion protein or a 
control protein in alum resulted in severe inflammation and joint damage, 
whereas the disease induced in rats immunized with the aldehyde-bearing fusion 
protein in alum was markedly attenuated. Similar results were obtained in a 
collagen-induced rat arthritis model. Anti-collagen II IgG Ab titers did not 
deviate significantly in groups pre-immunized with modified fusion protein and 
control protein, suggesting that anti-TNF vaccination did not skew the immune 
response related to disease induction. This study demonstrates synergy between 
particulate alum and protein bound carbonyl residues for enhancement of protein 
immunogenicity. The antigen-specific co-adjuvant system could prove advantageous 
for breaking tolerance in emerging auto-vaccination therapies targeting 
inflammatory cytokines as well as for enhancing a broader category of subunit 
vaccines. Aldehyde adduction introduces a minimal modification which, together 
with the established use of alum as a safe adjuvant for human use, could be 
favorable for further vaccine development.
