Fibroblast-like synoviocyte (FLS) is the ultimate effectual cells in the 
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The current study was undertaken to 
investigate whether a proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL) mediates the 
function of FLS in an animal model of RA. Rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA) 
was induced by intradermal injection of 0.1 ml complete Freund's adjuvant. 
Synovium APRIL expression was detected by immunohistochemical analysis. The 
level of APRIL and matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 were assayed by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The expression of APRIL and its receptors 
(TACI, BCMA and BAFF-R) were assessed by immunofluorescence staining, flow 
cytometry, reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and 
real-time RT-PCR. The effects of APRIL on the function of FLS were investigated 
by MTT, Quantibody Rat Inflammation Array 1 and transwell assays, respectively. 
A higher concentration of APRIL was detected in AA synovium homogenate compared 
with normal group. AA FLS expressed APRIL, TACI, BAFF-R and BCMA at the mRNA 
levels, whereas only APRIL and BCMA were confirmed to be expressed on membrane 
by flow cytometry. APRIL stimulated AA FLS proliferation, migration and invasion 
and the secretion of proinflammatory factors. In addition, FLS cocultured with 
APRIL-treated B cells or T cells had a significantly greater proliferation than 
FLS cultured alone. Neutralization of APRIL by the TACI-Ig fusion protein 
attenuated these stimulating effects of APRIL on FLS. Our data indicate that 
APRIL may act as an important mediator for facilitating the function of FLS. 
Blockade of APRIL thus may be a valuable adjunct in the treatment of RA.
