Our previous study showed that the use of ricinoleic acid as an oil phase 
resulted in the formation of a stable pluronic lecithin organogel (PLO gel) with 
better thixotropic properties and higher permeation of ketoprofen than the 
isopropyl palmitate PLO gel. This study aims to evaluate and compare the in 
vitro and in vivo anti-inflammatory effects of the ricinoleic acid PLO gel 
system with isopropyl palmitate PLO gel. Ketoprofen was used as a model drug. In 
vitro anti-inflammatory activity and cell viability tests were performed in 
human rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblast cell line using a blank 
ricinoleic acid PLO gel and compared to that of the isopropyl palmitate PLO gel. 
In vivo anti-inflammatory activity of ricinoleic acid PLO gel containing 10% 
ketoprofen was evaluated and compared with the isopropyl palmitate PLO gel in a 
carrageenan-induced rat paw edema model. The results from the in vitro study 
showed that the blank ricinoleic acid PLO gel possessed significantly higher 
anti-inflammatory activity than isopropyl palmitate PLO gel at 1 mM 
concentration (p<0.05), while both the gel formulations had no significant 
cytotoxic activity. Further in vivo testing of the formulation showed that the 
ricinoleic acid PLO gel formulation was significantly more effective in reducing 
pain and edema when compared to the isopropyl palmitate PLO gel. In addition, 
the ricinoleic acid PLO gel formulation markedly inhibited the synthesis of 
prostaglandin E2. In conclusion, the efficacy of PLO gels used in pain 
management may be enhanced by using ricinoleic acid instead of isopropyl 
palmitate as an oil phase.
