OBJECTIVE: Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) are a heterogeneous 
population of cells that have the ability to suppress T cell responses. The aim 
of this study was to evaluate the effects of the JAK inhibitor tofacitinib on 
MDSCs in a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in SKG mice by zymosan A (ZyA) injection. MDSCs 
isolated from the bone marrow (BM) of donor SKG mice with arthritis were 
adoptively transferred to recipient mice with arthritis. In a separate 
experiment, tofacitinib was administered to arthritic SKG mice subcutaneously 
via osmotic pump, in some cases followed by injection of an anti-Gr-1 monoclonal 
antibody (mAb). BM cells from untreated mice were cultured for 5 days with 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor, with or without tofacitinib, 
and then analyzed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The numbers of MDSCs and polymorphonuclear MDSCs (PMN-MDSCs) were 
significantly increased in the spleens of SKG mice following ZyA injection. 
Adoptive transfer of MDSCs to recipient arthritic mice reduced the severity of 
arthritis compared to that in untreated control mice. Treatment with tofacitinib 
also ameliorated the progression of arthritis in SKG mice and induced 
significantly higher numbers of MDSCs and PMN-MDSCs in the BM of these animals. 
Furthermore, administration of an anti-Gr-1 mAb reduced the antiarthritic effect 
of tofacitinib in SKG mice. In vitro, tofacitinib facilitated the 
differentiation of BM cells to MDSCs, and inhibited their differentiation to 
dendritic cells.
CONCLUSION: Tofacitinib facilitates the expansion of MDSCs and ameliorates 
arthritis in SKG mice.
