ARS-interacting multifunctional protein 1 (AIMP1) induces production of 
inflammatory cytokines from immune cells. Since osteoclastogenesis is promoted 
by positive regulation of inflammatory cytokines, whether AIMP1 could promote 
osteoclastogenesis was investigated. AIMP1 induced osteoclastogenesis and acted 
synergistically with RANKL to promote osteoclastogenesis. Down-regulation of 
CD23, an AIMP1 receptor, abolished AIMP1-mediated osteoclastogenesis. 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays showed that the AIMP1 level was significantly 
higher in the peripheral blood (PB) and synovial fluid of rheumatoid arthritis 
patients than in normal PB. A monoclonal antibody (clone 15B3AF) that blocked 
the cytokine activity of AIMP1 inhibited the AIMP1-mediated production of 
inflammatory cytokines. Clone 15B3AF inhibited the AIMP1-mediated 
osteoclastogenesis in vitro. We then cloned the complementary determining 
regions of clone 15B3AF and generated a chimeric antibody (atliximab). In a 
collagen-induced arthritis mouse model (CIA), atliximab administration 
significantly attenuated disease severity and improved various histopathological 
parameters. Three-dimensional micro-computed tomography scanning confirmed that 
atliximab enhanced the joint structures in CIA mice. Furthermore, atliximab 
decreased the expression of inflammatory cytokines in the serum and inflamed 
joints of CIA mice. Taken together, our findings suggest that AIMP1 exacerbates 
RA by promoting inflammation and osteoclastogenesis and that atliximab could be 
developed as a therapeutic antibody to target inflammatory diseases, including 
RA.
