Macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) enhances activation of leukocytes, 
endothelial cells and fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS), thereby contributing 
to the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). A MIF promoter polymorphism in 
RA patients resulted in higher serum MIF concentration and worsens bone erosion; 
controversially current literature reported an inhibitory role of MIF in 
osteoclast formation. The controversial suggested that the precise role of MIF 
and its putative receptor CD74 in osteoclastogenesis and RA bone erosion, 
mediated by locally formed osteoclasts in response to receptor activator of 
NF-κB ligand (RANKL), is unclear. We reported that in an in vivo K/BxN serum 
transfer arthritis, reduced clinical and histological arthritis in MIF(-/-) and 
CD74(-/-) mice were accompanied by a virtual absence of osteoclasts at the 
synovium-bone interface and reduced osteoclast-related gene expression. 
Furthermore, in vitro osteoclast formation and osteoclast-related gene 
expression were significantly reduced in MIF(-/-) cells via decreasing 
RANKL-induced phosphorylation of NF-κB-p65 and ERK1/2. This was supported by a 
similar reduction of osteoclastogenesis observed in CD74(-/-) cells. 
Furthermore, a MIF blockade reduced RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis via 
deregulating RANKL-mediated NF-κB and NFATc1 transcription factor activation. 
These data indicate that MIF and CD74 facilitate RANKL-induced 
osteoclastogenesis, and suggest that MIF contributes directly to bone erosion, 
as well as inflammation, in RA.
