The aim of the present study was to determine whether the expression of A 
disintegrin and metallproteinase 15 (ADAM15) affected the inflammatory 
conditions and cell migration in human fibroblast‑like synoviocytes (FLSs) in a 
rat model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The expression of ADAM15 in FLSs 
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was confirmed by reverse 
transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction and western blot analysis. 
The effects of small interfering RNA targeting ADAM15 (siADAM5) on 
pro‑inflammatory cytokines and chemokines were assessed using an enzyme‑linked 
immunosorbent assay. The effects of siADAM15 on cell invasion and migration in 
FLS were also assessed in vitro. The therapeutic effects and side effects of 
ADAM15 in a rat model of collagen‑induced arthritis (CIA) were examined in vivo. 
The present results revealed that ADAM15 expression was significantly elevated 
at the mRNA and protein level in FLSs stimulated with LPS and that silencing 
ADAM15 suppressed the expression of pro‑inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, 
preventing FLS cell migration and invasion via inhibiting vascular endothelial 
growth factor‑A, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)1 and MMP‑3 expression. In 
addition, treatment of CIA rats using siADAM15 significantly reduced the 
arthritis score and extent of joint damage in the rats. These findings indicated 
that silencing ADAM15 had anti‑inflammatory effects in FLSs and efficiently 
inhibited the development of CIA. Therefore, ADAM15 may be a potential target 
molecule for RA therapies.
