Sinomenine (SIN) has long been used as a therapeutic agent of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) in China. However, the discrepancy between low oral 
bioavailability and higher minimal effective concentration made its action mode 
mysterious. The present study aimed to gain insight into the mechanisms by which 
SIN suppressed collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in rats in view of Th17 and 
regulatory T (Treg) cell balance. SIN was orally administered, and the clinical 
symptoms of CIA rats were monitored; inflammatory cytokines levels in serum were 
measured by ELISA; pharmacokinetic studies were performed in normal and CIA 
rats; Th17 and Treg cell frequencies were analyzed by flow cytometry. The data 
showed that SIN treatment resulted in a dramatic decrease of arthritis scores 
and paw volume of CIA rats, which was accompanied by down-regulation of IL-17A 
and up-regulation of IL-10 in rat serum. The frequency of Treg cells was 
increased and the frequency of Th17 cells was decreased in the gut lymphoid 
tissues of SIN-treated rats. Immunohistochemistry assay demonstrated that more 
α4β7-positive cells were detained in joint tissues after SIN treatment. 
Moreover, the anti-arthritis efficacy of SIN disappeared when it was given by 
intraperitoneal injection, further confirming the action of SIN was 
gut-dependent. In conclusion, SIN exerts anti-RA action probably through 
modulating the frequencies of Treg cells and Th17 cells in intestinal lymph 
nodes and yielding a trafficking of lymphocytes (especially Treg cells) from gut 
to joint.
