The complexity of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) pathogenesis makes combined blockade 
of key pathogenic factors an attractive therapeutic strategy. We have previously 
reported a novel recombinant adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector, AAV.TFCF, 
which mediates separate coexpression of TNFα antagonist TNFR-Fc and T cell 
antagonist CTLA4-FasL both in vitro and in vivo (the injected joints). The 
purpose of this study was to examine the efficacy of TNFR-Fc/CTLA4-FasL 
combination therapy mediated by AAV.TFCF in experimental model of RA. 
Adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) was induced in Lewis rats, and the recombinant 
AAV.TFCF was injected into rat ankle joints. AAV vector encoding CTLA4-FasL 
(AAV.CTFA) or TNFR-Fc (AAV.TRFC) was used as the monotherapy control, and an AAV 
vector mediating the expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein (AAV.EGFP) 
was used as the negative control. The combination treatment mediated by AAV.TFCF 
demonstrated a more effective suppression of AIA compared with those monotherapy 
controls, as reflected in the clinical and histological observations. The 
synergistic anti-inflammatory effect of TNFR-Fc combining with CTLA4-FasL was 
proved to be associated with the greater reductions of inflammatory CD4+ T cell 
infiltration and proinflammatory cytokine TNFα level in the arthritic joints. In 
addition, the combination therapy was found to be able to increase the frequency 
of CD4 + CD25 + FoxP3+ regulatory T cell population in rat draining lymph nodes 
and suppress splenic inflammatory responses. These results suggest that 
combination treatment with TNFR-Fc and CTLA4-FasL may achieve superior efficacy 
in suppressing RA, and using this novel recombinant AAV.TFCF to obtain the 
combined counteraction of both pathogenic T cells and the key proinflammatory 
cytokine TNFα may provide a more effective and desirable strategy for treatment 
of RA.
