Osteoclasts, the primary bone resorbing cells, are responsible for destructive 
bone diseases such as postmenopausal osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and 
periodontitis. Many plant-derived traditional medicines that might suppress the 
formation and/or function of osteoclasts are promising treatments for 
osteoclast-related diseases. In this study, we investigated the effects of 
leonurine hydrochloride (LH) on receptor activator NF-κB ligand (RANKL)-induced 
osteoclastogenesis and ovariectomy-induced bone loss. LH is a synthetic chemical 
compound based on the structure of leonurine, which is found in motherwort and 
has been reported to exhibit phytoestrogenic activity. In RAW 264.7 cells and 
mouse bone marrow monocytes (BMMs), LH suppressed RANKL-induced 
osteoclastogenesis and actin ring formation in a dose-dependent manner. LH 
targeted RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption at an early stage. 
Molecular analysis demonstrated that LH attenuated RANKL-induced NF-κB signaling 
by inhibiting the phosphorylation and degradation of IκBα and NF-κB p65 nuclear 
translocation. LH inhibited the RANK-TRAF6 association triggered by RANKL 
binding and the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt axis, without 
significantly affecting the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK)/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and AP-1 signaling pathways. LH 
attenuated the RANKL-stimulated expression of osteoclast-related genes including 
NFATc1, tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), cathepsin K, and 
osteoclast-associated receptor (OSCAR). Consistent with the in vitro results, LH 
administration attenuated osteoclast activity, thus preventing bone loss caused 
by estrogen deficiency in mice. In this study, LH suppressed RANKL-induced 
osteoclastogenesis via RANK-TRAF6, NF-κB, and PI3K/Akt signaling. These data 
provide the first evidence that LH might be a promising therapeutic compound to 
treat osteoclast-related diseases, such as osteoporosis.
