OBJECTIVE: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are potent immunosuppressive cells that 
have shown promise in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Deciphering 
the intrinsic characteristics of MSCs that correlate with their biologic 
activity will facilitate their clinical use. Recently, the role of 
glucocorticoid-induced leucine zipper (GILZ) in the development of RA has been 
documented. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether GILZ expression by 
MSCs may contribute to their therapeutic effect.
METHODS: MSCs were isolated from GILZ-deficient (GILZ(-/-) ) mice and wild-type 
mice. MSCs (1 × 10(6) cells) were injected twice via the tail vein into mice 
with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA).
RESULTS: In vitro, we showed that GILZ is a key factor involved in the 
immunosuppressive potential of MSCs. MSCs derived from GILZ(-/-) mice did not 
suppress the proliferation of CD4+ T cells and were less efficient than MSCs 
derived from WT mice in altering Th17 cell polarization. Thus, we investigated 
the role of GILZ in an experimental model of arthritis and demonstrated that 
although WT MSCs significantly reduced paw swelling in arthritic mice, GILZ(-/-) 
MSCs did not. Moreover, the magnitude of the effects of GILZ(-/-) MSCs on Th17 
cell frequency was significantly lower than that of WT MSCs. The therapeutic 
effect of MSCs correlated with the generation of Treg cells bearing the 
CD4 + RORγt+IL-17(low) IL-10+ signature, and Th17 cell polarization was GILZ 
dependent.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that GILZ has an essential role in the 
therapeutic effectiveness of MSCs in arthritis by favoring Th17 cell 
polarization toward a regulatory phenotype. Therefore, potentiation of GILZ 
expression in MSCs could represent a means to enhance their therapeutic effect 
in autoimmune diseases.
