OBJECTIVE: EFNB1 and EFNB2 are ligands for Eph receptor tyrosine kinases. This 
study was undertaken to investigate how the expression of Efnb1 and Efnb2 on 
murine T cells influences the pathogenesis of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
and to assess correlations between the T cell expression of these 2 molecules 
and measures of disease activity in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: CIA was studied in mice with T cell-specific deletion (double gene 
knockout [dKO]) of both Efnb1 and Efnb2. Expression of EFNB1 and EFNB2 messenger 
RNA (mRNA) in peripheral blood T cells from patients with RA was determined by 
quantitative reverse transcription- polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In dKO mice, clinical scores of arthritis were reduced compared to 
those in wild-type (WT) control mice. Serum collagen-specific antibody titers in 
dKO mice were lower than those in WT mice. In analyses based on equal cell 
numbers, dKO mouse T cells, as compared to WT mouse T cells, provided vastly 
inferior help to B cells in the production of collagen-specific antibodies in 
vitro. T cells from dKO mice were compromised in their ability to migrate to the 
arthritic paws in vivo and in their ability to undergo chemotaxis toward CXCL12 
in vitro. Deletion mutation of Efnb1 and Efnb2 intracellular tails revealed 
critical regions in controlling T cell chemotaxis. T cells from RA patients 
expressed higher EFNB1 mRNA levels, which correlated with RA symptoms and 
laboratory findings.
CONCLUSION: Efnb1 and Efnb2 in T cells are essential for pathogenic antibody 
production and for T cell migration to the inflamed paws in mice with CIA. These 
findings suggest that the expression of EFNB1 in T cells might be a useful 
parameter for monitoring RA disease activity and treatment responses.
