BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Pro-inflammatory cytokines are important in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) and their production is mainly regulated by NF-κB and 
inflammasomes. Carboxyamidotriazole (CAI) exhibits potent anti-inflammatory 
activities by decreasing cytokines. Here, we have investigated NACHT, LRR and 
PYD domains-containing protein (NALP) inflammasomes in a rat model of RA and 
explored the therapeutic effects of CAI in this model and the involvement of 
NF-κB and inflammasomes in the actions of CAI.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The anti-arthritic effects of CAI were assessed in the 
adjuvant arthritis (AA) model in rats, using radiological and histological 
techniques. NALP1 and NALP3 inflammasomes, NF-κB pathway and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines levels were measured with Western blots, immunohistochemistry and 
ELISA.
KEY RESULTS: CAI decreased the arthritis index, improved radiological and 
histological changes, and reduced synovial IL-1β, IL-6, IL-18 and TNF-α levels 
in rats with AA. Compared with normal rats, the 70 kDa NALP1 isoform was 
up-regulated, NALP3 was down-regulated, and levels of the 165 kDa NALP1 isoform 
and the adaptor protein ASC were unchanged in synovial tissue from AA rats. CAI 
reduced the 70 kDa NALP1 isoform and restored NALP3 levels in AA rats; CAI 
inhibited caspase-1 activation in AA synovial tissue, but not its enzymic 
activity in vitro. In addition, CAI reduced expression of p65 NF-κB subunit and 
IκBα phosphorylation and degradation in AA rats.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: NALP1 inflammasomes were activated in synovial 
tissues from AA rats and appeared to be a novel therapeutic target for RA. CAI 
could have therapeutic value in RA by inhibiting activation of NF-κB and NALP1 
inflammasomes and by decreasing pro-inflammatory cytokines.
