Bone resorbing osteoclasts represent an important therapeutic target for 
diseases associated with bone and joint destruction, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis, periodontitis, and osteoporosis. The quantification of osteoclast 
resorptive activity in vitro is widely used for screening new anti-resorptive 
medications. The aim of this paper was to develop a simplified semi-automated 
method for the quantification of osteoclastic resorption using fluorescently 
labeled biomimetic mineral layers which can replace time intensive, often 
subjective and clearly non-sustainable use of translucent slices of tusks from 
vulnerable or endangered species such as the elephant. Osteoclasts were formed 
from RAW 264.7 mouse monocyte cell line using the pro-resorptive cytokine 
receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL). We confirmed that 
fluorescent labeling did not interfere with the biomimetic features of 
hydroxyapatite, and developed an automated method for quantifying osteoclastic 
resorption. Correlation between our assay and traditional manual measurement 
techniques was found to be very strong (R(2)=0.99). In addition, we modified the 
technique to provide depth and volume data of the resorption pits by confocal 
imaging at defined depths. Thus, our method allows automatic quantification of 
total osteoclastic resorption as well as additional data not obtainable by the 
current tusk slice technique offering a better alternative for high throughput 
screening of potential antiresorptives.

Copyright Â© 2015 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights 
reserved.
