Glucocorticoids signal through the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and are 
administered clinically for a variety of situations, including inflammatory 
disorders, specific cancers, rheumatoid arthritis, and organ/tissue 
transplantation. However, glucocorticoid therapy is also associated with 
additional complications, including steroid-induced diabetes. We hypothesized 
that modification of the steroid backbone is one strategy to enhance the 
therapeutic potential of GR activation. Toward this goal, two commercially 
unavailable, thiobenzothiazole-containing derivatives of hydrocortisone (termed 
MS4 and MS6) were examined using 832/13 rat insulinoma cells as well as rodent 
and human islets. We found that MS4 had transrepression properties but lacked 
transactivation ability, whereas MS6 retained both transactivation and 
transrepression activities. In addition, MS4 and MS6 both displayed 
anti-inflammatory activity. Furthermore, MS4 displayed reduced impact on islet 
Î²-cell function in both rodent and human islets. Similar to dexamethasone, MS6 
promoted adipocyte development in vitro, whereas MS4 did not. Moreover, neither 
MS4 nor MS6 activated the Pck1 (Pepck) gene in primary rat hepatocytes. We 
conclude that modification of the functional groups attached to the D-ring of 
the hydrocortisone steroid molecule produces compounds with altered 
structure-function GR agonist activity with decreased impact on insulin 
secretion and reduced adipogenic potential but with preservation of 
anti-inflammatory activity.
