OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of Flavonoids extracted from Echinps 
latifolius Tausch(FELT) on rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in rat model.
METHOD: Fifty SD rats were randomly divided into model group, control group, and 
low, medium, and high-dose FELT groups (n=10 in each group). Complete Freund's 
adjuvant (0.1 mL) was used to induce RA in rats. FELT in doses of 50 mg/kg, 100 
mg/kg, 150 mg/kg was given to rats in low, medium and high-dose FELT groups by 
gavage, and same volume of PBS was given to rats in control group. The arthritis 
score and the paw swelling score were measured to evaluate the therapeutic 
effect of FELT. Real time qPCR was used to detect the mRNA expression of 
fibronectin and MMP3 in synovial tissue and the mRNA expression of caspase 3, 
Bcl-2 and Bcl-2 associated X protein (Bax) in fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
(FLS).
RESULTS: The arthritis score and the paw swelling score were significantly 
decreased in three FELT groups compared to RA model rats (P <0.05). The relative 
expression levels of FN and MMP3 mRNA in synovium of three FELT-treatment groups 
were significantly lower than those in model group (1.80, 1.76 and 1.67 vs 2.53; 
1.69, 1.46 and 1.45 vs 2.67, respectively, all P <0.05). The relative expression 
levels of Bax and caspase 3 mRNA in FLSs of three FELT groups were higher than 
those in model group (0.56, 0.58 and 0.60 vs 0.30; 0.54, 0.56 and 0.59 vs 0.29, 
respectively, all P <0.05); while the relative expression levels of Bcl-2 mRNA 
in FELT groups were lower than that in model group (2.20, 2.08 and 2.08 vs 4.04, 
respectively, P <0.05).
CONCLUSION: FELT may inhibit the synovium proliferation in RA model rats through 
promoting the FLS apoptosis.
