AIM: Recently, there has been an increasing interest in tea (Camellia sinensis) 
as a protective agent against inflammatory diseases. Here, we evaluated/compared 
the anti-inflammatory activity of two different doses (0.5 and 1.0 g/kg body 
weight) of green tea aqueous extract (GTE, rich in catechins) and black tea 
aqueous extract (BTE, rich in theaflavins and thearubigins) in rat 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA).
METHODS: Adjuvant-induced arthritis rat model received orally/daily distilled 
water as vehicle, indomethacin (1.0 mg/kg body weight; a 
non-steroidal/anti-inflammatory drug), or tea aqueous extracts (for 28 or 14 
consecutive days starting from day 0 or 14 of arthritis induction, 
respectively).
RESULTS: The present study showed that only the high dose of GTE (from day 0) 
significantly alleviated (P < 0.05-0.001) all complications shown in arthritic 
rats, including synovial joint inflammation, elevation in erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate, blood leukocytosis (due to lymphocytosis and neutrocytosis), 
and changes in weight/cellularity of lymphoid organs. The anti-arthritic 
activity of the high dose of GTE (from day 0) was comparable (P > 0.05) with 
that of indomethacin (12.9-53.8 vs. 9.5-48.4%, respectively) and mediated by 
significantly decreasing and down-regulating (P < 0.001) the systemic production 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and the expression of chemokine receptor-5 in 
synovial tissues, respectively. Moreover, the anti-arthritic activity of tea 
aqueous extracts was in the following order: high dose of GTE > low dose of GTE 
≥ high dose of BTE > low dose of BTE.
CONCLUSION: The present study proved the anti-inflammatory activity of GTE over 
BTE and equal to that of indomethacin in AIA rat model.

© 2015 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.
