OBJECTIVE: We investigated whether leflunomide can be delivered topically and 
metabolized into teriflunomide through the skin, and evaluated the therapeutic 
effect of topical leflunomide.
METHODS: Permeation of leflunomide across and formation of its active metabolite 
within the skin was examined ex vivo. Deposition of teriflunomide in micropig 
knee joints after applying topical and transdermal patches containing 
leflunomide was investigated by determining the plasma and joint tissue 
concentrations. Finally, the anti-inflammatory effects and inhibition of skin 
sensitization by topical leflunomide were evaluated in a rat adjuvant arthritis 
model and mice with delayed-type induced hypersensitivity.
RESULTS: We found that after topical application of leflunomide on freshly 
excised mouse, rat and guinea pig skin, ∼24% of the permeated drug existed as 
teriflunomide. In micropigs treated topically with leflunomide on the knee 
joint, significantly lower teriflunomide concentrations were found in plasma, 
but its concentrations in the knee joint were 3.4-fold to 54.6-fold higher than 
those after oral administration. In a rat arthritis model, the plasma 
concentration of teriflunomide after treatment with 10% leflunomide topical 
solution was 7.54-fold lower than that after 10 mg/kg oral leflunomide. However, 
topical leflunomide was nearly as effective as oral in inhibiting paw edema (37% 
versus 56%, respectively). The values for hypersensitized mouse ear weight after 
treatment with topical leflunomide decreased significantly by 26% compared to 
vehicle.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that topically applied leflunomide can be 
delivered effectively and deposited as teriflunomide in an arthritic joint, 
possibly allowing better compliance in rheumatoid arthritis patients by avoiding 
leflunomide's side effects.
