Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) is a lipid-soluble antioxidant synthesized in human body. 
This enzyme promotes immune system function and can be used as a dietary 
supplement. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease leading to 
chronic joint inflammation. RA results in severe destruction of cartilage and 
disability. This study aimed to investigate the effect of CoQ10 on inflammation 
and Th17 cell proliferation on an experimental rheumatoid arthritis (RA) mice 
model. CoQ10 or cotton seed oil as control was orally administrated once a day 
for seven weeks to mice with zymosan-induced arthritis (ZIA). Histological 
analysis of the joints was conducted using immunohistochemistry. Germinal center 
(GC) B cells, Th17 cells and Treg cells of the spleen tissue were examined by 
confocal microscopy staining. mRNA expression was measured by real-time PCR and 
protein levels were estimated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Flow 
cytometric analysis (FACS) was used to evaluate Th17 cells and Treg cells. CoQ10 
mitigated the severity of ZIA and decreased serum immunoglobulin concentrations. 
CoQ10 also reduced RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis, inflammatory mediators and 
oxidant factors. Th17/Treg axis was reciprocally controlled by CoQ10 treatment. 
Moreover, CoQ10 treatment on normal mouse and human cells cultured in Th17 
conditions decreased the number of Th17 cells and enhanced the number of Treg 
cells. CoQ10 alleviates arthritis in mice with ZIA declining inflammation, Th17 
cells and osteoclast differentiation. These findings suggest that CoQ10 can be a 
potential therapeutic substance for RA.

Copyright Â© 2015 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
