Platonin, a photosensitizing dye, is known to possess antioxidant and 
anti-inflammatory activity. Platonin has been used to treat trauma, ulcers and 
some acute inflammations and it also reported to improve blood circulation and 
reduce mortality in endotoxin-induced rat models. Our previous studies 
established that platonin suppresses the lipopolysaccharides (LPS)-induced 
inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin-1β (IL-1β-+), IL-6, tumor necrosis 
factor-α (TNF-α), and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Nuclear factor-kB 
(NF-kB) and activator protein-1 (AP-1) transcription factors are reported to be 
essential in mediating the endotoxin-induced production of inflammatory 
molecules. In vivo studies from our groups revealed that platonin has potential 
effects on inhibiting pyrogen release, tissue damage and ischemia during 
heatstroke, ischemia reperfusion injury in lungs and also improve the survival 
of skin allografts in rats. Clinically, this compound has been proven to cure 
juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) and polyarteritis nodosa (PN). In this 
review, we summarize the pharmacological and clinical effects of platonin via 
describing the potential molecular mechanism of regulation of inflammatory 
molecules of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), including extracellular 
regulated kinase (ERK), c-jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38 MAPK and also 
NF-kB activation. Moreover, this paper discusses the signaling pathways 
expedited by NF-kB, AP-1, MAPKs and NO/NOS, these all have been reflected in 
inflammatory processes, and could be the encouraging molecular targets for the 
design of pharmaceutical drugs targeting antiinflammatory therapy.
