PURPOSE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory joint disorder, the 
progression of which leads to the destruction of cartilage and bone. Chemokines 
are involved in RA pathogenesis. In this study, we investigated the chemokine 
signaling pathway associated with CCL2 in peripheral blood (PB) and synovial 
tissues (ST) of RA patients based on our previous work about chemokine signaling 
pathway involved in the activation of CCL2 production in collagen-induced 
arthritis rat ST.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Total RNA was isolated from PB leukocytes and synovium of 
the knee joint in both RA patients and control populations. Real-time polymerase 
chain reaction was used to determine CCL4, CCR5, c-Jun, c-Fos, and CCL2 
expressions. Serum level of CCL2 was assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay, and the production of CCL2 in ST was analyzed immunohistochemically.
RESULTS: The expressions of CCL4, CCR5, c-Jun, c-Fos, and CCL2 messenger RNA in 
RA patients were significantly higher than those in healthy controls, both in ST 
and on PB leukocyte. Serum CCL2 levels were elevated in RA patients. 
Histological examination of rheumatoid joints revealed extensive CCL2 expression 
in RA ST.
CONCLUSION: CCL2, CCL4, c-Jun, c-Fos, and CCR5 may play an important role in the 
recruitment of PB leukocytes into the RA joints. These data provide evidence 
that the chemokine signaling pathway is involved in CCL2 expression in RA 
patient tissues, which may contribute to chronic inflammation associated with 
RA. Targeting this signaling pathway may provide a novel therapeutic avenue in 
RA.
