Chronic inflammation is considered as a critical cause of a host of disorders, 
such as cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, atherosclerosis, and neurodegenerative 
diseases, although the exact mechanism is yet to be explored. Imaging tools that 
can specifically target inflammation are therefore important to help reveal the 
role of inflammation in disease progression, and allows for developing new 
therapeutic strategies to ultimately improve patient care. The purpose of this 
study was to develop a new in vivo inflammation imaging approach by targeting 
the cannabinoid receptor type 2 (CB2R), an emerging inflammation biomarker, 
using a unique near infrared (NIR) fluorescent probe. Herein, we report the 
first in vivo CB2R-targeted NIR inflammation imaging study using a synthetic 
fluorescent probe developed in our laboratory, NIR760-mbc94. In vitro binding 
assay and fluorescence microscopy study indicate NIR760-mbc94 specifically binds 
towards CB2R in mouse RAW264.7 macrophage cells. Furthermore, in vivo imaging 
was performed using a Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA)-induced inflammation 
mouse model. NIR760-mbc94 successfully identified inflamed tissues and the probe 
uptake was blocked by a CB2R ligand, SR144528. Additionally, immunofluorescence 
staining in cryosectioned tissues validated the NIR760-mbc94 uptake in inflamed 
tissues. In conclusion, this study reports the first in vivo CB2R-targeted 
inflammation imaging using an NIR fluorescent probe. Specific targeting of 
NIR760-mbc94 has been demonstrated in macrophage cells, as well as a CFA-induced 
inflammation mouse model. The combined evidence indicates that NIR760-mbc94 is a 
promising inflammation imaging probe. Moreover, in vivo CB2R-targeted 
fluorescence imaging may have potential in the study of inflammation-related 
diseases.
