Chronic peripheral inflammation mediated by cytokines such as TNFα, IL-1β, and 
IL-6 is associated with psychiatric disorders like depression and anxiety. 
However, it remains elusive which distinct type of peripheral inflammation 
triggers neuroinflammation and affects hippocampal plasticity resulting in 
depressive-like behavior. We hypothesized that chronic peripheral inflammation 
in the human TNF-α transgenic (TNFtg) mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis 
spreads into the central nervous system and induces depressive state manifested 
in specific behavioral pattern and impaired adult hippocampal neurogenesis. 
TNFtg mice showed severe erosive arthritis with increased IL-1β and IL-6 
expression in tarsal joints with highly elevated human TNF-α levels in the 
serum. Intriguingly, IL-1β and IL-6 mRNA levels were not altered in the 
hippocampus of TNFtg mice. In contrast to the pronounced monocytosis in joints 
and spleen of TNFtg mice, signs of hippocampal microgliosis or astrocytosis were 
lacking. Furthermore, locomotion was impaired, but there was no 
locomotion-independent depressive behavior in TNFtg mice. Proliferation and 
maturation of hippocampal neural precursor cells as well as survival of newly 
generated neurons were preserved in the dentate gyrus of TNFtg mice despite 
reduced motor activity and peripheral inflammatory signature. We conclude that 
peripheral inflammation in TNFtg mice is mediated by chronic activation of the 
innate immune system. However, severe peripheral inflammation, though impairing 
locomotor activity, does not elicit depressive-like behavior. These structural 
and functional findings indicate the maintenance of hippocampal immunity, 
cellular plasticity, and behavior despite peripheral innate inflammation.
