In the current study we evaluated the effects of immunoproteasome inhibition 
using ONX 0914 (formerly PR-957) to ameliorate graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). 
ONX 0914, an LMP7-selective epoxyketone inhibitor of the immunoproteasome, has 
been shown to reduce cytokine production in activated monocytes and T cells and 
attenuate disease progression in mouse models of rheumatoid arthritis, colitis, 
systemic lupus erythematosus, and, more recently, encephalomyelitis. Inhibition 
of LMP7 with ONX 0914 in the B10.BR→CBA MHC-matched/minor histocompatibility 
antigen (miHA)-disparate murine blood and marrow transplant (BMT) model caused a 
modest but significant improvement in the survival of mice experiencing GVHD. 
Concomitant with these results, in vitro mixed lymphocyte cultures revealed that 
stimulator splenocytes, but not responder T cells, treated with ONX 0914 
resulted in decreased IFN-γ production by allogeneic T cells in both 
MHC-disparate (B10.BR anti-B6) and miHA-mismatched (B10.BR anti-CBA) settings. 
In addition, a reduction in the expression of the MHC class I-restricted 
SIINFEKL peptide was observed in splenocytes from transgenic 
C57BL/6-Tg(CAG-OVA)916Jen/J mice exposed to ONX 0914. Taken together, these data 
support that LMP7 inhibition in the context of BMT modulates allogeneic 
responses by decreasing endogenous miHA presentation and that the consequential 
reduction in allogeneic stimulation and cytokine production reduces GVHD 
development.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
