INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory autoimmune 
disease that affects around 1% of the human population worldwide. RA diagnosis 
can be difficult as there is no definitive test for its detection. Therefore, 
the aim of this study was to identify biomarkers that could be used for RA 
diagnosis.
METHODS: Sera from a collagen-induced arthritis mouse model were used to select 
potential biomarkers for RA diagnosis by phage display technology. In silico and 
in vitro analyses were performed to characterize and validate the selected 
peptides. Samples were classified into three groups: RA; two other 
immune-mediated rheumatic diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and 
ankylosing spondylitis (AS)); and healthy controls (HC). Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was carried out to determine antibody levels, and 
diagnostic parameters were determined by constructing receiver operating 
characteristic curves. Mass spectrometry and Western blot were performed to 
identify the putative autoantigen that was mimicked by a highly reactive 
mimotope.
RESULTS: After three rounds of selection, 14 clones were obtained and tested for 
immunoreactivity analysis against sera from RA and HC groups. The phage-fused 
peptide with the highest immunoreactivity (M12) was synthesized, and was able to 
efficiently discriminate RA patients from SLE, AS and HCs (p < 0.0001) by ELISA. 
The specificity and sensitivity of anti-M12 antibodies for RA diagnosis were 91 
% and 84.3 %, respectively. The M12 peptide was identified as one that mimics a 
predicted antigenic site of the carbonic anhydrase III (CAIII) protein, a 
ubiquitous biomarker that has been identified in patients with other diseases.
CONCLUSION: M12 is the first peptide associated with the CAIII protein that may 
be used as an antigen for antibody detection to aid in RA diagnosis with high 
sensitivity and specificity.
