ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Tripterygium wilfordii (lei gong teng; Thunder 
of God Vine), which belongs to the Celastraceae family, has long been used in 
traditional Chinese medicine to treat inflammation and rheumatoid arthritis. 
Celastrol is a bioactive compound isolated from T. wilfordii.
AIM OF THE STUDY: We investigated whether celastrol suppressed binding of 
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) to myeloid differentiation factor 2 (MD2), thereby 
downregulating Toll-like receptor4 (TLR4) activation in mouse primary 
macrophages.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cytokine expression was determined by polymerase chain 
reaction analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in bone marrow-derived 
primary macrophages (BMDMs). The kinase activity of tank-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) 
was examined by a luciferase reporter assay and an in vitro kinase assay. LPS 
binding to MD2 was examined by an in vitro binding assay and confocal microscopy 
analysis.
RESULTS: Celastrol reduced LPS-induced expression of inflammatory cytokines, 
such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-12, and IL-1β, at 
both the mRNA and protein levels in BMDMs. Celastrol suppressed LPS binding to 
MD2, as shown by the in vitro binding assay, whereas it did not inhibit TBK1. In 
addition, co-localization of LPS with MD2 in BMDMs was blocked by celastrol. The 
inhibitory effects of celastrol on LPS binding to MD2 were reversed by thiol 
donors (N-acetyl-L-cysteine and dithiothreitol), suggesting that the thiol 
reactivity of celastrol contributes to its inhibitory effects on TLR4 activation 
in macrophages.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that celastrol suppresses TLR4 activation 
through the inhibition of LPS binding to the TLR4/MD2 complex. These results 
provide a novel mechanism of action by which celastrol contributes to the 
anti-inflammatory activity of T. wilfordii.
