Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease with high rates of 
morbidity and mortality. Previous studies proposed that the A disintegrin and 
metalloprotease (ADAM) family is involved in the regulation of inflammation and 
arthritis. Thus, the present study investigated whether ADAM10 is involved in 
the progression of RA. The effects of ADAM10 small interfering (si)RNA on the 
expression levels of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)‑α, interleukin (IL)‑6, IL‑8 and 
chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 16 (CXCL16) were determined in fibroblast‑like 
synoviocytes (FLS). In addition, the effects of ADAM10 siRNA on cell 
proliferation, invasion and migration in human RA‑FLS were assessed in vitro. 
The therapeutic efficacy and side‑effects of ADAM10 siRNA were examined in a 
mouse model of collagen‑induced arthritis (CIA). In vitro, ADAM10 silencing 
suppressed the expression of TNF‑α, IL‑6, IL‑8 and CXCL16 in lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS)‑stimulated human RA‑FLS. LPS‑induced RA‑FLS proliferation, migration and 
invasion were significantly attenuated by ADAM10 knockdown. ADAM10 silencing 
inhibited the secretion of vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF‑A) and 
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)‑3 and ‑9 from LPS‑stimulated human RA‑FLS, in 
addition to inhibiting the phosphoinositide 3‑kinase/AKT activation in 
LPS‑stimulated human RA‑FLS. In vivo, treatment with siRNA against ADAM10 for 
three weeks reduced the arthritis score. Serum levels of VEGF‑A, MMP‑3 and MMP‑9 
were also reduced in CIA mice. These observations indicate that the inhibition 
of ADAM10 may be a viable therapeutic target in the amelioration of disease 
progression in RA by attenuating FLS proliferation, migration and invasion.
