BACKGROUND: Little is known presently about the effects of nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on the longitudinal bone growth occurring in 
the growth plate. We have examined the effects of administration of different 
types of NSAIDs on the longitudinal growth of the growth plate using a fetal rat 
metatarsal bone culture model.
METHODS: Cultured fetal rat metatarsal bones were used to study the effect of 
nonselective (indomethacin) and selective cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2, celecoxib) 
NSAIDs on longitudinal bone growth. The effect of NSAIDs on proliferation and 
apoptosis of growth plate chondrocytes were analyzed by BrdU incorporation and a 
TUNEL assay. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production was measured by an ELISA kit. We 
also examined the effect of exogenous PGE2 on the growth plate.
RESULTS: NSAIDs caused a dose-dependent growth retardation of cultured 
metatarsal bones. Both nonselective and COX-2 selective NSAIDs inhibit 
longitudinal bone growth. We found that NSAIDs suppressed the proliferation of 
chondrocytes and production of PGE2, and increased the apoptosis of 
chondrocytes. Supplemental PGE2 could not reverse the effects of NSAIDs on the 
growth plate.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that NSAIDs induce a dose-dependent growth 
retardation of cultured rat metatarsal bones. A detailed analysis revealed 
decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis of chondrocytes in the growth 
plate, indicating that COX-2 is responsible for PGE2 production in growth plate 
chondrocytes.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The data from the present study suggest that deleterious 
effects on the growth plate by chronic NSAIDs use should be considered for 
children who have chronic inflammatory diseases, such as juvenile rheumatoid 
arthritis.
