Osteoclasts are bone-specific multinucleated cells generated by differentiation 
of monocyte/macrophage hematopoietic lineages and degrade bone matrix by 
secretion of lytic enzymes. The regulation of osteoclast differentiation 
provides a potential strategy for treatment of bone-lytic damage. In this study, 
cilostazol, an inhibitor of type III phosphodiesterase, inhibited RANKL 
[receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B (RANK) ligand]-induced RANK 
expression in bone marrow-derived monocyte/macrophage precursors (BMMs) and Raw 
264.7 cells by inhibiting PU.1 via SIRT1 activation. RANKL-induced RANK 
expression was attenuated by cilostazol and rSIRT1 in Raw 264.7 cells, and these 
were blocked by sirtinol. In line with these, cilostazol elevated SIRT1 mRNA and 
protein levels in 12-24h and increased SIRT1 activity, and these effects were 
inhibited by sirtinol. Furthermore, the RANKL-induced nuclear expression of 
PU.1, a transcription factor required for macrophage differentiation, was 
suppressed by cilostazol. Additionally, marked RANKL-induced RANK 
immunofluorescence staining in Raw 264.7 cells was attenuated by cilostazol and 
rSIRT1, and both attenuations were prevented by sirtinol. Extensive RANK 
staining of knee synovial tissues in a mouse model of collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) was markedly reduced by cilostazol (30mg/kg/day). In line with these 
results, both RANKL- and M-CSF-induced differentiation of BMMs to multinucleated 
TRAP(+) giant cells and resorption pit formation were inhibited by cilostazol 
associated with a decrease in TRAP (a marker enzyme of osteoclasts) activity. In 
conclusion, cilostazol activates SIRT1, which suppresses the nuclear 
translocation of PU.1, and thus, inhibits RANKL-stimulated RANK expression and 
causes anti-osteoclast formation in BMMs in vitro and in their murine model of 
CIA.
