OBJECTIVES: Chronic synovitis is the main characteristic of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), defined by the proliferation of synovial lining cells, an important source 
of chemokines and cytokines associated with inflammation. The aim of this study 
was to examine the influence of complement functional activity on the 
development of chronic synovitis.
METHOD: The experiments were conducted in zymosan-induced arthritis (ZIA) 
provoked by intra-articular injection of 180 μg zymosan. Mice were treated with 
10 ng/g body weight (bw) cobra venom factor (CVF) on days -3 and -2 or with 10 
ng/g bw CVF on days 7, 12, and 17 of ZIA. The percentage of neutrophils 
(CD11b+Ly6G+), macrophages (F4/80), and complement 5 anaphylatoxin receptor 
(C5aR)-positive cells in the synovial fluid (SF) were determined by flow 
cytometry and the expression of C5aR and C3aR in the synovium was detected 
immunohistochemically.
RESULTS: The induction of ZIA in the absence of complement activity strongly 
inhibited the development of synovitis. By contrast, complement activation 
during ZIA exacerbated chronic synovitis through an increase in macrophage 
infiltration, C5aR and C3aR expression in the joints, and C5aR expression on SF 
cells. Levels of C5a and soluble receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B 
ligand (sRANKL) in the SF were elevated whereas neutrophil infiltration and 
levels of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α and interleukin (IL)-6 in the SF were 
unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate an important role for functional complement 
activity in the maintenance of chronic synovitis in a model of RA. Antagonizing 
complement activation represents new possibilities for the amelioration of 
synovitis symptoms.
