The treatment of autoimmune disorders has been revolutionised by the 
introduction of biologics such as anti-tumour necrosis factor (anti-TNF). 
Although in rheumatoid arthritis patients a bone sparing effect of anti-TNF has 
been shown, the mechanism is not fully understood. Anti-TNF molecules block 
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and prevent signalling via both TNF receptor 1 
(TNFR1; p55) and TNF receptor 2 (TNFR2; p75). However, signalling via TNFR2 is 
reported to have protective effects in a number of cell and organ systems. Hence 
we set out to investigate if pharmacological inhibition of TNFR1 had 
differential effects compared to pan-TNF inhibition in both an in vitro 
cell-based model of human osteoclast activity and an in vivo mouse model of 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced osteolysis. For the in vitro experiments the 
anti-human TNFR1 domain antibody (dAb) DMS5541 was used, whereas for the in vivo 
mouse experiments the anti-mouse TNFR1 dAb DMS5540 was used. We show that 
selective blocking of TNFR1 signalling reduced osteoclast formation in the 
presence of TNF. Subcutaneous LPS injection over the calvaria leads to the 
development of osteolytic lesions within days due to inflammation driven 
osteoclast formation. In this model, murine TNFR2 genetically fused with mouse 
IgG1 Fc domain (mTNFR2.Fc), an anti-TNF, did not protect from bone loss in 
contrast to anti-TNFR1, which significantly reduced lesion development, 
inflammatory infiltrate, and osteoclast number and size. These results support 
further exploring the use of TNFR1-selective inhibition in inflammatory bone 
loss disorders such as osteomyelitis and peri-prosthetic aseptic loosening.
