IL-1β is a potent proinflammatory cytokine of the innate immune system that is 
involved in host defense against infection. However, increased production of 
IL-1β plays a pathogenic role in various inflammatory diseases, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, gout, sepsis, stroke, and transplant rejection. To prevent 
detrimental collateral damage, IL-1β release is tightly controlled and typically 
requires two consecutive danger signals. LPS from Gram-negative bacteria is a 
prototypical first signal inducing pro-IL-1β synthesis, whereas extracellular 
ATP is a typical second signal sensed by the ATP receptor P2X7 that triggers 
activation of the NLRP3-containing inflammasome, proteolytic cleavage of 
pro-IL-1β by caspase-1, and release of mature IL-1β. Mechanisms controlling 
IL-1β release, even in the presence of both danger signals, are needed to 
protect from collateral damage and are of therapeutic interest. In this article, 
we show that acetylcholine, choline, phosphocholine, phosphocholine-modified LPS 
from Haemophilus influenzae, and phosphocholine-modified protein efficiently 
inhibit ATP-mediated IL-1β release in human and rat monocytes via nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors containing subunits α7, α9, and/or α10. Of note, we 
identify receptors for phosphocholine-modified macromolecules that are 
synthesized by microbes and eukaryotic parasites and are well-known modulators 
of the immune system. Our data suggest that an endogenous anti-inflammatory 
cholinergic control mechanism effectively controls ATP-mediated release of IL-1β 
and that the same mechanism is used by symbionts and misused by parasites to 
evade innate immune responses of the host.
