BACKGROUND: Anemone flaccida Fr . Schmidt (Ranunculaceae) (Di Wu in Chinese) is 
used to treat punch injury and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, the active 
compounds and underlying mechanism of action mediating the anti-arthritic 
effects of A. flaccida remain unclear. This study aims to evaluate the 
underlying action mechanism of A. flaccida crude triterpenoid saponins (AFS) on 
RA using a type II collagen (CII)-induced arthritis (CIA) rat model, and to 
assess the anti-inflammatory effects of the main active compounds of AFS, namely 
flaccidoside II, anhuienoside E, glycoside St-I4a, hemsgiganoside B, 
hederasaponin B, and 3-O-α-l-rhamnopyranosyl (1 → 2)-β-d-glucopyranosyl 
oleanolic acid 28-O-β-d-glucopyranosyl (1 → 6)-β-d-glucopyranosyl ester.
METHODS: Male Wistar rats (n = 50) were randomly separated into five groups 
(n = 10) and immunized by CII injection. AFS (200 or 400 mg/kg) and 
dexamethasone were orally administered for 30 days after establishing the model. 
The arthritis severity was assessed by paw volume using a plethysmometer. After 
30 days of treatment, the right hind paws of the rats were obtained. Paw 
histology was analyzed by hematoxylin and eosin staining, and radiologic imaging 
was performed by micro-computed tomography. MTT assays were used to evaluate the 
cytotoxicity of AFS and its main compounds in RAW264.7 cells. Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay kits were used to measure interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF)-α in serum and supernatants from AFS- and main AFS 
compound-treated RAW264.7 cells stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
RESULTS: Anemone flaccida crude triterpenoid saponins inhibited redness and 
swelling of the right hind paw in the CIA model. Radiological and histological 
examinations indicated that inflammatory responses were reduced by AFS 
treatment. Moreover, comparing with untreated rats, serum TNF-α (P = 0.0035 and 
P < 0.001) and IL-6 (P = 0.0058 and P = 0.0087) were lower in AFS-treated CIA 
rats at the dose of 200 and 400 mg/kg/day. AFS and its main compounds, including 
hederasaponin B, flaccidoside II, and hemsgiganoside B, significantly inhibited 
TNF-α (P = 0.0022, P = 0.013, P = 0.0015, and P = 0.016) and IL-6 (P = 0.0175, 
P < 0.001, P < 0.001, and P < 0.001) production in LPS-treated RAW264.7 cells, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Anemone flaccida crude triterpenoid saponins and its main bioactive 
components, including hederasaponin B, flaccidoside II, and hemsgiganoside B, 
decreased pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in a CIA rat model and LPS-induced 
RAW264.7 cells.
