Numerous studies have demonstrated that rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is often 
associated with bone loss; however, few experiments have focused on cancellous 
and cortical bone changes in rats during the process of arthritis. We have 
investigated bone changes in rats with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and have 
explored the characteristics of how RA induces osteoporosis by means of bone 
histomorphometry, bone biomechanics studies, bone mineral density studies, micro 
computer tomography, enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay, immunohistochemistry, 
and Western blot analysis. Bone mineral density of the femur and lumbar 
vertebrae and biomechanical properties of the femur were decreased in CIA rats. 
Trabecular bone volume of the tibia and lumbar vertebrae was decreased whereas 
bone resorption was increased in CIA rats. Bone formation of the tibial shaft in 
periosteal surfaces was decreased in CIA rats. Furthermore, the trabecular bone 
loss in CIA rats was severer at 16 weeks than at 8 weeks, as was cortical bone 
loss. The serum level of tumor necrosis factor α in CIA rats was increased, and 
the expression of dickkopf 1 and that of receptor activator of nuclear factor κB 
(RANKL) ligand (RANKL) in the ankle joints were also increased, but the 
expression of osteoprotegerin (OPG) was decreased. We conclude that CIA rats 
developed systemic osteoporosis, and that osteoporosis became more serious with 
CIA development. The mechanism may be related to the increase of bone resorption 
in cancellous bone cause by upregulation of the expression of DKK-1 and 
regulation of the RANKL/RANK/OPG signaling pathway, and the decrease of bone 
formation in cortical bone caused by an increase in the expression of DKK-1.
