Hemophilic arthropathy is a debilitating condition that can develop as a 
consequence of frequent joint bleeding despite adequate clotting factor 
replacement. The mechanisms leading to repeated spontaneous bleeding are 
unknown. We investigated synovial, vascular, stromal, and cartilage changes in 
response to a single induced hemarthrosis in the FVIII-deficient mouse. We found 
soft-tissue hyperproliferation with marked induction of neoangiogenesis and 
evolving abnormal vascular architecture. While soft-tissue changes were rapidly 
reversible, abnormal vascularity persisted for months and, surprisingly, was 
also seen in uninjured joints. Vascular changes in FVIII-deficient mice involved 
pronounced remodeling with expression of α-Smooth Muscle Actin (SMA), Endoglin 
(CD105), and vascular endothelial growth factor, as well as alterations of joint 
perfusion as determined by in vivo imaging. Vascular architecture changes and 
pronounced expression of α-SMA appeared unique to hemophilia, as these were not 
found in joint tissue obtained from mouse models of rheumatoid arthritis and 
osteoarthritis and from patients with the same conditions. Evidence that 
vascular changes in hemophilia were significantly associated with bleeding and 
joint deterioration was obtained prospectively by dynamic in vivo imaging with 
musculoskeletal ultrasound and power Doppler of 156 joints (elbows, knees, and 
ankles) in a cohort of 26 patients with hemophilia at baseline and during 
painful episodes. These observations support the hypothesis that vascular 
remodeling contributes significantly to bleed propagation and development of 
hemophilic arthropathy. Based on these findings, the development of molecular 
targets for angiogenesis inhibition may be considered in this disease.
