The inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a causative agent of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), a chronic inflammatory disease complicated with 
degenerative arthritic cartilage. However, the precise mechanism of IL-6 on 
chondrocyte apoptosis is largely unclear. Acid-sensing ion channels (ASICs), a 
family of extracellular H(+)-activated cation channels, can be transiently 
activated by extracellular acid and play a pivotal role in acid-induced cell 
injury. In the present study, to investigate the role of IL-6 in regulating 
acid-induced articular chondrocyte apoptosis, primary rat articular chondrocytes 
were subjected to different treatments with or without IL-6 in the presence of 
acid. The results showed that the mRNA and protein expressions of ASIC1a were 
significantly increased in articular cartilage and chondrocytes of adjuvant 
arthritis (AA) rats. IL-6 could dramatically upregulate the level of ASIC1a in a 
time- and dose-dependent manner, and induce the activation of JAK2, STAT3, ERK, 
JNK and NF-κB in articular chondrocytes. Moreover, both the respective 
inhibitors of these signaling pathways and the specific antibody against IL-6 
receptor (tocilizumab) could partially abrogate the ASIC1a upregulation induced 
by IL-6. Furthermore, IL-6 inhibited the cell viability and enhanced LDH 
release, [Ca(2+)]i elevation, and apoptosis in acid-induced articular 
chondrocytes, and these changes could be reversed by using psalmotoxin 1(PcTX1), 
which is the specific antagonist of ASIC1a. In addition, pretreatment with PcTX1 
could inhibit the downregulated expression of Bcl-2 and the upregulated 
expression of Bax induced by IL-6 in acid-induced articular chondrocytes. Taken 
together, these results indicated that IL-6 could enhance acid-induced articular 
chondrocyte apoptosis, the mechanism of which might partially be involved with 
its ability of regulating the activation of ASIC1a-dependent JAK2/STAT3 and 
MAPK/NF-κB signaling pathways.
