The CD32a immunoglobulin G (IgG) receptor (FcÎ³ receptor IIa) is a potential 
therapeutic target for diseases in which IgG immune complexes (ICs) mediate 
inflammation, such as heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, rheumatoid arthritis, 
and systemic lupus erythematosus. Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are a promising 
strategy for treating such diseases. However, IV.3, perhaps the best 
characterized CD32a-blocking mAb, was recently shown to induce anaphylaxis in 
immunocompromised "3KO" mice. This anaphylactic reaction required a human CD32a 
transgene because mice lack an equivalent of this gene. The finding that IV.3 
induces anaphylaxis in CD32a-transgenic mice was surprising because IV.3 had 
long been thought to lack the intrinsic capacity to trigger cellular activation 
via CD32a. Such an anaphylactic reaction would also limit potential therapeutic 
applications of IV.3. In the present study, we examine the molecular mechanisms 
by which IV.3 induces anaphylaxis. We now report that IV.3 induces anaphylaxis 
in immunocompetent CD32a-transgenic "FCGR2A" mice, along with the novel finding 
that IV.3 and 2 other well-characterized CD32a-blocking mAbs, AT-10 and MDE-8, 
also induce severe thrombocytopenia in FCGR2A mice. Using recombinant variants 
of these same mAbs, we show that IgG "Fc" effector function is necessary for the 
induction of anaphylaxis and thrombocytopenia in FCGR2A mice. Variants of these 
mAbs lacking the capacity to activate mouse IgG receptors not only failed to 
induce anaphylaxis or thrombocytopenia, but also very potently protected FCGR2A 
mice from near lethal doses of IgG ICs. Our findings show that 
effector-deficient IV.3, AT-10, and MDE-8 are promising candidates for 
developing therapeutic mAbs to treat CD32a-mediated diseases.
