BMP induces osteoblast differentiation, whereas a key proinflammatory cytokine, 
TNF-α, causes inflammatory bone damage shown in rheumatoid arthritis. FGF 
molecules are known to be involved in bone homeostasis. However, the effects of 
FGF-8 on osteoblast differentiation and the interaction between FGF-8, BMPs and 
TNF-α have yet to be clarified. Here we investigated the effects of FGF-8 in 
relation to TNF-α actions on BMP-2-induced osteoblast marker expression using 
myoblast cell line C2C12, osteoblast precursor cell line MC3T3-E1 and rat 
calvarial osteoblasts. It was revealed that FGF-8 inhibited BMP-2-induced 
expression of osteoblast differentiation markers, including Runx2, osteocalcin, 
alkaline phosphatase, type-1 collagen and osterix, in a concentration-dependent 
manner. The inhibitory effects of FGF-8 on BMP-induced osteoblast 
differentiation and Smad1/5/8 activation were enhanced in the presence of TNF-α 
action. FGF-8 also inhibited BMP-2-induced expression of Wnt5a, which activates 
a non-canonical Wnt signaling pathway. FGF-8 had no significant influence on the 
expression levels of TNF receptors, while FGF-8 suppressed the expression of 
inhibitory Smad6 and Smad7, suggesting a possible feedback activity through FGF 
to BMP receptor (BMPR) signaling. Of note, inhibition of ERK activity and FGF 
receptor (FGFR)-dependent protein kinase, but not JNK or NFκB pathway, 
suppressed the FGF-8 actions on BMP-induced osteoblast differentiation. FGF-8 
was revealed to suppress BMP-induced osteoblast differentiation through the ERK 
pathway and the effects were enhanced by TNF-α. Given the finding that FGF-8 
expression was increased in synovial tissues of rheumatoid arthritis, the 
functional interaction between FGFR and BMPR signaling may be involved in the 
development process of inflammatory bone damage.
