BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Anti-tumour necrosis factor [TNF] monoclonal antibodies 
[infliximab, adalimumab] induce complete mucosal healing in a proportion of 
patients with Crohn's disease whereas a TNF receptor fusion protein [etanercept] 
is not effective and the anti-TNF F[ab']2 fragment [certolizumab] shows a very 
low rate of complete mucosal healing. In contrast, all four TNF-neutralising 
drugs have demonstrated efficacy in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. These 
observations suggest that factors other than neutralisation of TNF may 
contribute to clinical outcomes in Crohn's disease. Here we tested the 
hypothesis that Fc receptor [FcR]-mediated effects may contribute to the 
therapeutic response of anti-TNF antibodies in inflammatory bowel disease.
METHODS: We modified an IgG2c mouse anti-TNF antibody that binds the 
high-affinity FcRs to generate an IgG1 isotype with strongly diminished binding. 
We examined the therapeutic effects of both antibodies in the T cell transfer 
model of inflammatory bowel disease and the collagen-induced arthritis model.
RESULTS: The IgG2c anti-TNF antibody prevented colonic inflammation in the T 
cell transfer model of colitis, whereas the IgG1 anti-TNF did not. Conversely, 
both the IgG2c and IgG1 anti-TNFs were similarly effective in reducing the 
severity of articular inflammation in mouse collagen-induced arthritis.
CONCLUSION: These data support the concept that the mechanism of action for 
TNF-neutralising drugs may differ across immune-mediated diseases and, 
potentially, between therapeutics within a particular disease. Our data suggest 
a specific role of Fc-mediated immune regulation in the resolution of intestinal 
inflammation by anti-TNF monoclonal antibodies.

Copyright © 2015 European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation (ECCO). Published by 
Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.
