Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (hUC‑MSCs) hold great potential in 
the search for therapies to treat refractory diseases, including rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), due to their potential regenerative ability and extensive 
source. However, the role of hUC‑MSCs in vivo and the repair mechanisms for RA 
remain to be fully elucidated. The present study aimed to determine whether 
hUC‑MSCs exert immunomodulatory effects and have anti‑inflammatory capabilities 
in the treatment of embolisms. Following the transplantation of hUC‑MSCs into 
collagen type Ⅱ‑induced arthritic (CIA) model rats, magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) in vivo was performed, and the levels of interleukin (IL)‑1, IL‑17, tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF)‑α, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), tissue 
factor (TF), CD4+CD25+ T cells (Treg) and antithrombin (AT) were measured. 
Bromodeoxyuridine staining was performed for histopathological examinations. As 
revealed by immunofluorescence and MRI experiments, the injected hUC‑MSCs 
preferentially migrated to the inflammatory joint sites of the rats. The Treg 
cell percentage and AT levels in the hUC‑MSC‑treated group were markedly 
increased, whereas the levels of IL‑1, IL‑17, TNF‑α, VEGF and TF were decreased 
compared with those in the CIA model group. The values determined for these 
parameters in the hUC‑MSC‑treated group returned to approximately the identical 
values as those of the control group on day 35 post‑therapy. Superparamagnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) may serve as an effective, non‑invasive method 
for tracking transplanted cells in vivo. The present study provided direct 
evidence that hUC‑MSCs in the CIA rat model migrated to the inflammatory joint 
sites, effectively promoting recovery from collagen type II damage and thereby 
improving the immune‑associated prothrombotic state.
