BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disorder 
characterized by polyarticular symmetrical arthritis. The prevalence of RA is 
consistent worldwide, affecting about 0.5%-1.0% of the population. The aim of 
this study was to investigate whether Saussurea lappa (costus) could ameliorate 
adjuvant arthritis (AA) in the rat for 21 days.
METHODS: Animals were divided into eight groups (n=5/group). Group 1 acted as 
control, group 2 presented the AA rats (positive control), and groups 3, 4, and 
5 were treated with different doses of S. lappa (200, 400, and 600 mg/kg, 
respectively), whereas groups 6, 7, and 8 were AA rats and orally administered 
with S. lappa (200, 400, and 600 mg/kg, respectively). The changes caused by 
chronic inflammation were evaluated through the measurement of ankle 
circumference (AC). Serum C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukins (IL-1β and 
IL-6), tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), total oxidative capacity (TOC), and 
total antioxidant capacity (TAC) were determined.
RESULTS: Saussurea lappa dose-dependently alleviated the severity of the disease 
based on the reduction in AC and on the clinical scores of the histological 
study. Histopathological examination proved that S. lappa decreased the 
infiltration of inflammatory cells and synovial hyperplasia as well as protected 
joint destruction. Saussurea lappa reduced the serum levels of CRP, TNF-α, 
IL-1β, and IL-6, reduced the TOC, and improved the TAC as compared with AA rats.
CONCLUSIONS: The S. lappa extract has potentially useful anti-arthritic activity 
as well as improves the immune and antioxidant responses of adjuvant-induced 
monoarthritis in rats.
