BACKGROUND: We have previously reported that anti-death receptor 5 (DR5) 
monoclonal antibody (mAb) is therapeutically effective in the treatment of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in a collagen-induced arthritis rat model. However, 
the molecular mechanism and the effect of anti-DR5 mAb on proapoptotic genes and 
cytokine secretion in the human fibroblast-like synovial cells (FLS) requires 
further clarification. This study may provide new evidence for the application 
of anti-DR5 mAb as a treatment for RA.
METHODS: Human FLS were isolated from patients with RA and were treated with 
anti-DR5 mAb. An MTT assay and flow cytometry were used to detect the induction 
of apoptosis in vitro. Cytokine secretion by the FLS was detected using the 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The mRNA expression was assessed by reverse 
transcription polymerase chain reaction, and the protein expression was analyzed 
by Western blot. The apoptotic pathway was investigated further using a caspase 
inhibition assay.
RESULTS: Anti-DR5 mAb-induced apoptosis in human RA FLS in vitro. The protein 
expressions of caspase-8, -3, and -9 were decreased in human anti-DR5 
mAb-treated FLS in a dose-dependent manner through exposure to a caspase 
inhibitor, indicating that anti-DR5 mAb induction of apoptosis is through the 
caspase pathway. Decreased levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and 
interferon-γ (IFN-γ) were detected after treatment with anti-DR5 mAb in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Anti-DR5 mAb may induce apoptosis in human FLS through the caspase 
pathway and through decreased secretions of TNF-α and IFN-γ.
