INTRODUCTION: Pannus formation and resulting cartilage destruction during 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) depends on the migration of synoviocytes to cartilage 
tissue. Here, we focused on the role of hypoxia-inducible factor 
(HIF)-2α-induced chemokines by chondrocytes in the regulation of fibroblast-like 
synoviocyte (FLS) migration into the cartilage-pannus interface and cartilage 
erosion.
METHODS: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), K/BxN serum transfer, and tumor 
necrosis factor-α transgenic mice were used as experimental RA models. 
Expression patterns of HIF-2α and chemokines were determined via immunostaining, 
Western blotting and RT-PCR. FLS motility was evaluated using transwell 
migration and invasion assays. The specific role of HIF-2α was determined via 
local deletion of HIF-2α in joint tissues or using conditional knockout (KO) 
mice. Cartilage destruction, synovitis and pannus formation were assessed via 
histological analysis.
RESULTS: HIF-2α and various chemokines were markedly upregulated in degenerating 
cartilage and pannus of RA joints. HIF-2α induced chemokine expression by 
chondrocytes in both primary culture and cartilage tissue. HIF-2α -induced 
chemokines by chondrocytes regulated the migration and invasion of FLS. Local 
deletion of HIF-2α in joint tissues inhibited pannus formation adjacent to 
cartilage tissue and cartilage destruction caused by K/BxN serum transfer. 
Furthermore, conditional knockout of HIF-2α in cartilage blocked pannus 
formation in adjacent cartilage but not bone tissue, along with inhibition of 
cartilage erosion caused by K/BxN serum transfer.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that chemokines induced by IL-1β or HIF-2α in 
chondrocytes regulate pannus expansion by stimulating FLS migration and 
invasion, leading to cartilage erosion during RA pathogenesis.
