Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease characterized by chronic 
inflammatory synovitis leading to joint destruction and systemic bone loss. The 
inflammation-induced bone loss is mediated by increased osteoclast formation and 
function. Current antirheumatic therapies primarily target suppression of 
inflammatory cascade with limited or no success in controlling progression of 
bone destruction. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) by virtue of their tissue repair 
and immunomodulatory properties have shown promising results in various 
autoimmune and degenerative diseases. However, the role of MSCs in prevention of 
bone destruction in RA is not yet understood. In this study, we investigated the 
effect of adipose-derived MSCs (ASCs) on in vitro formation of bone-resorbing 
osteoclasts and pathological bone loss in the mouse collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) model of RA. We observed that ASCs significantly inhibited receptor 
activator of NF-κB ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclastogenesis in both a 
contact-dependent and -independent manner. Additionally, ASCs inhibited 
RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis in the presence of proinflammatory cytokines 
such as TNF-α, IL-17, and IL-1β. Furthermore, treatment with ASCs at the onset 
of CIA significantly reduced clinical symptoms and joint pathology. 
Interestingly, ASCs protected periarticular and systemic bone loss in CIA mice 
by maintaining trabecular bone structure. We further observed that treatment 
with ASCs reduced osteoclast precursors in bone marrow, resulting in decreased 
osteoclastogenesis. Moreover, ASCs suppressed autoimmune T cell responses and 
increased the percentages of peripheral regulatory T and B cells. Thus, we 
provide strong evidence that ASCs ameliorate inflammation-induced systemic bone 
loss in CIA mice by reducing osteoclast precursors and promoting immune 
tolerance.
