BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease that 
leads to joint destruction, disability, and decreased quality of life (QOL). 
Inhibition of Janus kinase (JAK) signaling ameliorates articular inflammation 
and joint destruction in animal models of RA, but its effects on behaviors 
indicating well-being are poorly understood. In this study, we evaluated the 
effect of JAK inhibition on spontaneous locomotor activity in rats with 
adjuvant-induced arthritis, a rodent model of RA.
METHODS: Arthritis was induced in male Lewis rats by a single subcutaneous 
injection of Freund's complete adjuvant. The novel JAK inhibitor JTE-052 was 
orally administered for 7 days after the onset of arthritis.
RESULTS: Induction of arthritis suppressed the spontaneous locomotor activity of 
the rats. Administration of JTE-052 completely improved the spontaneous 
locomotor activity, with partial reductions in articular inflammation and joint 
destruction. Hyperalgesia and motor functions were also improved, but the 
efficacy was not complete. However, serum interleukin (IL)-6 levels were 
completely decreased at 4 h after administration of the first dose of JTE-052.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that JAK inhibition improved the 
spontaneous locomotor activity of rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis, in 
association with amelioration of pain and physical dysfunction as a consequence 
of suppression of joint inflammation. Moreover, although further studies are 
needed, there was possible participation of IL-6 downregulation in the 
improvement of locomotor activity by JAK inhibition.
