Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a progressive, inflammatory autoimmune disease. As 
RA progresses, the hyperplastic synovial pannus creates a hypoxic, inflammatory 
environment that induces angiogenesis. Further vascularization of the synovial 
tissue promotes pannus growth and continued infiltration of inflammatory 
leukocytes, thus perpetuating the disease. Pristimerin inhibits inflammation and 
tumor angiogenesis. The present study focused on the inhibition of angiogenesis 
by Pristimerin in adjuvant-induced arthritic rats and the underlying molecular 
mechanisms. Our results clearly demonstrate for the first time that Pristimerin 
significantly reduces vessel density in synovial membrane tissues of inflamed 
joints and reduces the expression of pro-angiogenic factors in sera, including 
TNF-Î±, Ang-1, and MMP-9. Pristimerin also decreased the expression of VEGF and 
p-VEGFR2 in the synovial membrane, whereas the total amount of VEGFR2 remained 
unchanged. Pristimerin suppressed the sprouting vessels of the aortic ring and 
inhibited VEGF-induced HFLS-RA migration in vitro. Pristimerin also inhibited 
VEGF-induced proliferation, migration and tube formation by HUVECs, blocked the 
autophosphorylation of VEGF-induced VEGFR2 and consequently downregulated the 
signaling pathways of activated PI3K, AKT, mTOR, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38 in 
VEGF-induced HUVECs. Our results indicate that Pristimerin suppressed synovial 
angiogenesis in our rat model and in vitro by interrupting the targeting of 
VEGFR2 activation. Therefore, Pristimerin has potential as an angiogenesis 
inhibitor in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
