Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease associated with a 
combination of synovium joint inflammation, synovium hyperplasia, and 
destruction of cartilage and bone. Oleanolic acid acetate (OAA), a compound 
isolated from Vigna angularis, has been known to possess pharmacological 
activities, including anti-inflammation and anti-bone destruction. In this 
study, we investigated the effects of OAA on RA and the underlying mechanisms of 
action by using a type-II collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model and tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF)-α-stimulated RA synovial fibroblasts. Oral administration 
of OAA decreased the clinical arthritis symptoms, paw thickness, histologic and 
radiologic changes, and serum total and anti-type II collagen IgG, IgG1, and 
IgG2a levels. OAA administration reduced Th1/Th17 phenotype CD4(+) T lymphocyte 
expansions and inflammatory cytokine productions in T cell activated draining 
lymph nodes and spleen. OAA reduced the expression and production of 
inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines and matrix metalloproteinase 
(MMP)-1/3, in the ankle joint tissue and RA synovial fibroblasts by 
down-regulating Akt, mitogen-activated protein kinases, and nuclear factor-κB. 
Our results clearly support that OAA plays a therapeutic role in RA pathogenesis 
by modulating helper T cell immune responses and matrix-degrading enzymes. The 
immunosuppressive effects of OAA were comparable to dexamethasone and 
ketoprofen. We provide evidences that OAA could be a potential therapeutic 
candidate for RA.
