It has been proposed that peptide epitopes bind to MHC class II molecules to 
form distinct structural conformers of the same MHC II-peptide complex termed 
type A and type B, and that the two conformers of the same peptide-MHC II 
complex are recognized by distinct CD4 T cells, termed type A and type B T 
cells. Both types recognize short synthetic peptides but only type A recognize 
endosomally processed intact antigen. Type B T cells that recognize self 
peptides from exogenously degraded proteins have been shown to escape negative 
selection during thymic development and so have the potential to contribute to 
the pathogenesis of autoimmunity. We generated and characterized mouse CD4 T 
cells specific for an arthritogenic epitope of the candidate joint autoantigen 
proteoglycan aggrecan. Cloned T-cell hybridomas specific for a synthetic peptide 
containing the aggrecan epitope showed two distinct response patterns based on 
whether they could recognize processed intact aggrecan. Fine mapping 
demonstrated that both types of T-cell recognized the same core epitope. The 
results are consistent with the generation of aggrecan-specific type A and type 
B T cells. Type B T cells were activated by supernatants released from degrading 
cartilage, indicating the presence of antigenic extracellular peptides or 
fragments of aggrecan. Type B T cells could play a role in the pathogenesis of 
proteoglycan-induced arthritis in mice, a model for rheumatoid arthritis, by 
recognizing extracellular peptides or protein fragments of joint autoantigens 
released by inflamed cartilage.
