AIM: Aconiti Lateralis Radix Preparata is a traditional Chinese medicine used to 
treat chronic arthritis and is highly effective against rheumatoid arthritis. 
However, the effects of aconine, a derivative of aconitum alkaloids, on 
osteoclasts, which can absorb bone, remain unknown. Here, we investigated the 
effects of aconine on osteoclast differentiation and bone resorption in vitro.
METHODS: The viability of mouse leukemic monocyte/macrophage cell line RAW264.7 
was measured using CCK-8 assays. Osteoclast differentiation was induced by 
incubation of RAW264.7 cells in the presence of RANKL, and assessed with TRAP 
staining assay. Bone resorption was examined with bone resorption pits assay. 
The expression of relevant genes and proteins was analyzed using RT-PCR and 
Western blots. The activation of NF-κB and nuclear factor of activated T-cells 
(NFAT) was examined using stable NF-κB and NFATc1 luciferase reporter gene 
systems, RT-PCR and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Aconine (0.125, 0.25 μmol/L) did not affect the viability of RAW264.7 
cells, but dose-dependently inhibited RANKL-induced osteoclast formation and 
bone resorptive activity. Furthermore, aconine dose-dependently inhibited the 
RANKL-induced activation of NF-κB and NFATc1 in RAW264.7 cells, and subsequently 
reduced the expression of osteoclast-specific genes (c-Src, β3-Integrin, 
cathepsin K and MMP-9) and the expression of dendritic cell-specific 
transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP), which played an important role in cell-cell 
fusion.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that aconine inhibits RANKL-induced 
osteoclast differentiation in RAW264.7 cells by suppressing the activation of 
NF-κB and NFATc1 and the expression of the cell-cell fusion molecule DC-STAMP.
