Chronic inflammation is associated with immunosuppression and downregulated 
expression of the TCR CD247. In searching for new biomarkers that could validate 
the impaired host immune status under chronic inflammatory conditions, we 
discovered that sorting nexin 9 (SNX9), a protein that participates in early 
stages of clathrin-mediated endocytosis, is downregulated as well under such 
conditions. SNX9 expression was affected earlier than CD247 by the generated 
harmful environment, suggesting that it is a potential marker sensing the 
generated immunosuppressive condition. We found that myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells, which are elevated in the course of chronic inflammation, are responsible 
for the observed SNX9 reduced expression. Moreover, SNX9 downregulation is 
reversible, as its expression levels return to normal and immune functions are 
restored when the inflammatory response and/or myeloid-derived suppressor cells 
are neutralized. SNX9 downregulation was detected in numerous mouse models for 
pathologies characterized by chronic inflammation such as chronic infection 
(Leishmania donovani), cancer (melanoma and colorectal carcinoma), and an 
autoimmune disease (rheumatoid arthritis). Interestingly, reduced levels of SNX9 
were also observed in blood samples from colorectal cancer patients, emphasizing 
the feasibility of its use as a diagnostic and prognostic biomarker sensing the 
host's immune status and inflammatory stage. Our new discovery of SNX9 as being 
regulated by chronic inflammation and its association with immunosuppression, in 
addition to the CD247 regulation under such conditions, show the global impact 
of chronic inflammation and the generated immune environment on different 
cellular pathways in a diverse spectrum of diseases.
