Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease characterized by synovial 
hyperplasia and chronic inflammation, which lead to the progressive destruction 
of cartilage and bone in the joints. Numerous studies have reported that 
administrations of various types of MSCs improve arthritis symptoms in animal 
models, by paracrine mechanisms. However, the therapeutic effects of the 
secreted factors alone, without the cell graft, have been uncertain. Here, we 
show that a single intravenous administration of serum-free conditioned medium 
(CM) from human deciduous dental pulp stem cells (SHED-CM) into anti-collagen 
type II antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA), a mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA), markedly improved the arthritis symptoms and joint destruction. The 
therapeutic efficacy of SHED-CM was associated with an induction of 
anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages in the CAIA joints and the abrogation of RANKL 
expression. SHED-CM specifically depleted of an M2 macrophage inducer, the 
secreted ectodomain of sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin-9 (ED-Siglec-9), 
exhibited a reduced ability to induce M2-related gene expression and attenuate 
CAIA. SHED-CM also inhibited the RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis in vitro. 
Collectively, our findings suggest that SHED-CM provides multifaceted 
therapeutic effects for treating CAIA, including the ED-Siglec-9-dependent 
induction of M2 macrophage polarization and inhibition of osteoclastogenesis. 
Thus, SHED-CM may represent a novel anti-inflammatory and reparative therapy for 
RA.
