The aim of the present study was to determine a more specific, efficient and 
simple method for the induction of collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in rats. 
Different strains of rats were injected at the base of the tail with bovine type 
II collagen (CII) emulsified in incomplete Freund's adjuvant (IFA). The onset 
and severity of arthritis were evaluated by clinical assessment. The established 
CIA model was analyzed using a comprehensive examination of clinical, 
hematological, histological and radiological parameters. The results 
demonstrated that Wistar rats were the most susceptible strain to CIA followed 
by Wistar Furth rats, with Sprague Dawley rats being the least susceptible. 
Following primary and booster immunization, female Wistar rats developed severe 
arthritis, with an incidence of >83% and low variability in clinical signs. The 
development of arthritis was accompanied by a significantly elevated erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate compared with that in the control rats. The radiographic 
examination revealed bone matrix resorption, considerable soft tissue swelling, 
periosteal new bone formation and bone erosion in the arthritic joints of the 
CIA rats. Histopathologically, the synovial joints of CIA rats were 
characterized by synovial hyperplasia, pannus formation, marked cellular 
infiltration, bone and cartilage erosion and narrowing of the joint space. The 
administration of an intradermal injection of only 200 Âµg bovine CII emulsified 
in IFA at the base of the tail therefore leads to the successful development of 
a CIA rat model. This well-characterized CIA rat model could be specifically 
used to study the pathophysiology of human rheumatoid arthritis as well as to 
test and develop anti-arthritic agents for humans.
