Sanmiao formula (SM) is a compound prescription, which has been used in 
traditional Chinese medicine since the Ming Dynasty for gouty and rheumatoid 
arthritis treatments. However, no evidence has been unfolded to show the 
relationship between SM and gouty arthritis (GA), particularly inhibiting 
cartilage matrix degradation. In the present study, we undertook a 
characterization of anti-GA activity of SM using an in vivo rat model induced by 
potassium oxonate and cold bath together with in vitro studies with chondrocytes 
for further molecular characterization. Potassium oxonate and cold bath rats 
were treated with SM at doses of 7.2g/kg per day for 5days. SM treatments 
significantly suppressed the swelling rate and the severe pathologic changes in 
the joints of the animals in gout model. Inflammatory factors count by ELISA 
analysis, SM exhibited inhibition on IL-1β and TNF-α. Moreover, histological 
analysis of the joints and SM-serum substantially interfered with the 
MSU-induced expression of glycosaminoglycans (GAG), up-regulated the content of 
proteoglycan. Importantly, SM interfered with GA-augmented expression of matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs) -3 and aggrecanases (ADAMTS)-4, which are considered 
to be key enzymes in cartilage matrix degradation, and simultaneously augmented 
GA-reduced tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) -1 and -3 expression 
in the joints and chondrocytes. Therefore, SM is looking forward to be a 
potential novel agent that could prevent cartilage matrix degradation 
effectively in gouty arthritis, and this provides a new target for development 
of new medicines.
