BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic immune-mediated inflammatory 
disease characterized by cellular infiltration into the joints, 
hyperproliferation of synovial cells and bone damage. Available treatments for 
RA only induce remission in around 30% of the patients, have important adverse 
effects and its use is limited by their high cost. Therefore, compounds that can 
control arthritis, with an acceptable safety profile and low production costs 
are still an unmet need. We have shown, in vitro, that celastrol inhibits both 
IL-1Î² and TNF, which play an important role in RA, and, in vivo, that celastrol 
has significant anti-inflammatory properties. Our main goal in this work was to 
test the effect of celastrol in the number of sublining CD68 macrophages (a 
biomarker of therapeutic response for novel RA treatments) and on the overall 
synovial tissue cellularity and joint structure in the adjuvant-induced rat 
model of arthritis (AIA).
METHODS: Celastrol was administered to AIA rats both in the early (4 days after 
disease induction) and late (11 days after disease induction) phases of 
arthritis development. The inflammatory score, ankle perimeter and body weight 
were evaluated during treatment period. Rats were sacrificed after 22 days of 
disease progression and blood, internal organs and paw samples were collected 
for toxicological blood parameters and serum proinflammatory cytokine 
quantification, as well as histopathological and immunohistochemical evaluation, 
respectively.
RESULTS: Here we report that celastrol significantly decreases the number of 
sublining CD68 macrophages and the overall synovial inflammatory cellularity, 
and halted joint destruction without side effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results validate celastrol as a promising compound for the 
treatment of arthritis.
