The present article describes the preparation of β-emitter lutetium-177-labeled 
zirconia colloid and its preliminary physicochemical and biological evaluation 
of suitability for local radionuclide therapy. The new (177)Lu-labeled 
therapeutic radiopharmaceutical candidate was based on the synthesis mode of a 
previously described zirconia nanoparticle system. The size and shape of the 
developed radiopharmaceutical compound were observed through a scanning electron 
microscope and dynamic light scattering methods. The radiocolloid had a 1.7 μm 
mean diameter and showed high in vitro radiochemical and colloid size stability 
at room temperature and during the blood sera stability test. After the in vitro 
characterizations, the product was investigated in the course of the treatment 
of a spontaneously diseased dog veterinary patient's hock joint completed with 
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging follow-up 
measurements and a dual-isotope SPECT imaging tests with conventional 
(99m)Tc-methanediphosphonic acid bone scintigraphy. In the treated dog, no 
clinical side-effects or signs of histopathological changes of the joints were 
recorded during the treatment. SPECT follow-up studies clearly and conspicuously 
showed the localization of the (177)Lu-labeled colloid in the hock joint as well 
as detectable but negligible leakages of the radiocolloid in the nearest lymph 
node. On the basis of biological follow-up tests, the orthopedic team assumed 
that the (177)Lu-labeled zirconia colloid-based local radionuclide therapy 
resulted in a significant and long-term improvement in clinical signs of the 
patient without any remarkable side-effects.
