Metformin (Met) and coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) are reported to have therapeutic 
functions in several inflammatory diseases. These drugs have shown 
anti-inflammatory effects and have been utilized in mouse models of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). However, there is no evidence of the additive effect of Met and 
CoQ10 in RA. Although Met and CoQ10 may be involved in the improvement of 
mitochondrial dysfunction, limited information is available regarding whether 
this effect can improve mitochondrial dysfunction in RA in particular. In this 
study, we sought to determine whether Met and CoQ10 attenuate the severity of 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and show an additive effect in a mouse model. 
The combination of Met and CoQ10 improved CIA, reducing joint inflammation, Th17 
differentiation and IgG production. In contrast, the combination of Met and 
CoQ10 induced Treg differentiation. Osteoclastogenesis was reduced by the 
combination of Met and CoQ10. The protein expression of interleukin-1Î², 
interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in mice splenocytes exposed to 
lipopolysaccharide decreased after drug combination therapy. We also found that 
the expression of JC-1 and COX IV were enhanced by treatment with the 
combination of Met and CoQ10. Moreover, the combination of Met and CoQ10 
promoted mitochondrial O2 consumption. These findings suggest that the 
combination of Met and CoQ10 reduced CIA severity, improving mitochondrial 
dysfunction compared to Met or CoQ10 alone. These results present a novel, 
significant preventive targets in RA and may enhance our understanding of its 
pathogenesis.
