Progressive cartilage destruction, mediated by invasive fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes, is a central feature in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA). Members of the Snail family of transcription factors are required for cell 
migration and invasion, but their role in joint destruction remains unknown. 
Herein, we demonstrate that Snail is essential for the formation of 
extracellular matrix-degrading invadosomal structures by synovial cells from 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rats and RA patients. Mechanistically, Snail 
induces extracellular matrix degradation in synovial cells by repressing PTEN, 
resulting in increased phosphorylation of platelet-derived growth factor 
receptor and activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT pathway. Of 
significance, Snail is overexpressed in synovial cells and tissues of CIA rats 
and RA patients, whereas knockdown of Snail in CIA joints prevents cartilage 
invasion and joint damage. Furthermore, Snail expression is associated with an 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition gene signature characteristic of 
transglutaminase 2/transforming growth factor-β activation. Transforming growth 
factor-β and transglutaminase 2 stimulate Snail-dependent invadosome formation 
in rat and human synoviocytes. Our results identify the Snail-PTEN 
platelet-derived growth factor receptor/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase axis as a 
novel regulator of the prodestructive invadosome-forming phenotype of synovial 
cells. New therapies for RA target inflammation, and are only partly effective 
in preventing joint damage. Blocking Snail and/or its associated gene expression 
program may provide an additional tool to improve the efficacy of treatments to 
prevent joint destruction.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
