Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and 
periodontitis-caused bone destruction, results from an increase of 
bone-resorbing osteoclasts (OCs) induced by inflammation. However, the detailed 
mechanisms underlying this disorder remain unclear. We herein investigated that 
the effect of urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) on inflammatory 
osteoclastogenesis induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), which is a potent 
stimulator of bone resorption in inflammatory diseases. We found that the uPA 
deficiency promoted inflammatory osteoclastogenesis and bone loss induced by 
LPS. We also showed that LPS induced the expression of uPA, and the uPA 
treatment attenuated the LPS-induced inflammatory osteoclastogenesis of RAW264.7 
mouse monocyte/macrophage lineage cells. Additionally, we showed that the 
uPA-attenuated inflammatory osteoclastgenesis is associated with the activation 
of plasmin/protease-activated receptor (PAR)-1 axis by uPA. Moreover, we 
examined the mechanism underlying the effect of uPA on inflammatory 
osteoclastogenesis, and found that uPA/plasmin/PAR-1 activated the adenosine 
monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathway through Ca2+/calmodulin 
dependent protein kinase kinase (CaMKK) activation, and attenuated inflammatory 
osteoclastogenesis by inactivation of NF-ÎºB in RAW264.7 cells. These data 
suggest that uPA attenuated inflammatory osteoclastogenesis through the 
plasmin/PAR-1/Ca2+/CaMKK/AMPK axis. Our findings may provide a novel therapeutic 
approach to bone loss caused by inflammatory diseases.
