In previous study in the literature, the effect of ultrasound on the transdermal 
permeation of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, diclofenac has been 
investigated. Therapeutic ultrasound can increase circulation in the inflamed 
joint and decrease arthritic pain. Recently, transdermal drug delivery has been 
demonstrated by ultrasound (US) combining with microbubbles (MBs) contrast 
agent. In this study, the efficiency of US-MBs mediated diclofenac delivery for 
adjuvant-induced rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in rats was evaluated. RA was induced 
by injection of 100 μl Freund's complete adjuvant into the ankle joint in SD 
male rats (250-300g) and were randomly divided into five groups: (1) control 
group (C); (2) penetrating diclofenac alone (D); (3) US alone (U); (4) US 
combined with penetrating diclofenac (DU); (5) US combined with MBs and 
penetrating diclofenac (DUB). The evaluations of ankle width were performed for 
10 days by high frequency (40MHz) US B-mode and color Doppler mode imaging 
before and after treatment. Longitudinal US images of arthritis induced show 
synovitis and neovascularity. After treatment, only a little neovascularity has 
been observed. The recovery rate at 10th day in the group DUB (97.7±2.7 %) was 
significantly higher than in the group C (1.0±2.7 %), group D (37.5±4.6 %), 
group U (75.5±4.2 %) and group DU (87.3±5.2 %) (p <; 0.05). Our results 
investigated that the treatments of US and MBs can increase skin permeability to 
enhance diclofenac sodium delivery and inhibit inflammation of the tissues 
surrounded the arthritic ankle. In color Doppler imaging, after the combination 
treatment, the synovial neoangiogenesis in the arthritic area was reduced 
quickly.
