Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) syndromes have been regarded as the crucial 
clinical manifestations for individualized diagnosis and treatment of complex 
diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and cancer. Especially, RA 
patients are classified into cold and hot syndromes with different clinical 
manifestations, interventions and molecular mechanisms. Better effectiveness of 
a classic cold syndrome-specific herbal formula Wu-tou decoction (WTD) has been 
achieved. To explore molecular mechanisms of syndrome-specific formulae is of 
great clinical significance to improve the effectiveness and pertinence of 
treatment for the complex diseases with personalized conditions. However, the 
scientific basis of WTD treatment on RA with the cold syndrome remains unclear. 
Here, we predicted the putative targets for composite compounds contained in WTD 
using drugCIPHER-CS and constructed a WTD herbs-putative targets-RA related 
genes network. Next, a list of major WTD targets was identified based on their 
topological features, including the degree, node betweenness, closeness and 
k-coreness in the above pharmacological network. Importantly, pathway enrichment 
analysis revealed that these major WTD targets were significantly associated 
with the pathway of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma 
(PPAR-γ) coactivators in thermogenesis. These computational findings were 
subsequently verified by experiments on a rat model of collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) with cold or hot syndromes, and on human fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes-rheumatoid arthritis (HFLS-RA) cell line. In conclusion, the 
pathway of PPAR-γ coactivators in thermogenesis might be one of the potential 
pharmacological targets of WTD to alleviate RA with the TCM cold syndrome. These 
findings may open new avenues for designing individualized treatment regimens 
for RA patients.
