INTRODUCTION: IL-1β signalling has a critical role in the pathogenesis of 
various types of inflammatory arthritis including rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We 
aimed to investigate the therapeutic effects of human IL-1 receptor antagonist 
with Fc fragment (hIL-1Ra-Fc) on autoimmune arthritis and to identify the 
possible mechanisms by which hIL-1RA-Fc exerts anti-arthritic effects in a 
murine model of RA and patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) murine model was established in DBA/1J 
mice. The levels of various cytokines were determined by using enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. The mouse joints were assessed for clinical arthritis score 
and histologic features. Th17 cells and Treg cells were stained by using 
antibodies specific for CD4, IL-17, CD25, and FoxP3. Osteoclastogenesis was 
determined by TRAP staining and real-time PCR.
RESULTS: hIL-1RA-Fc reduced the arthritis incidence, histological inflammation 
and cartilage score in the CIA model. The expression of proinflammatory 
cytokines, VEGF and RANK, was reduced in the affected joint of 
hIL-1Ra-Fc-treated mice. hIL-1Ra-Fc-treated mice showed decreased number of Th17 
cells with increased number of Treg cells in spleens. hIL-1Ra-Fc reduced Th17 
cell differentiation by inactivation of STAT3 signalling, and reciprocally 
induced Treg cell differentiation through STAT5 signalling. In addition, the 
expression of IL-17, TNF-α, RANKL, and VEGF was decreased, while Foxp3 gene 
expression was increased in PBMCs of RA patients after administration of 
hIL-1Ra-Fc.
CONCLUSION: The anti-arthritis effects of hIL-1RA-Fc are associated with 
regulation of balance between Th17 cells and Treg cells and suppression of 
osteoclastogenesis and angiogenesis in the affected joints.

Copyright © 2016 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
