OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of interleukin-35 (IL-35) on vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptors, Flt-1 and Flk-1, in a 
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: We established a CIA mouse model and injected IL-35 intraperitoneally. 
The articular index (AI) was measured based on the amount of erythema, swelling, 
or joint rigidity and synovial histology was measured by hematoxylin and eosin 
staining (HE staining). The levels of VEGF, Flt-1, Flk-1, and von Willebrand 
factor (vWF) expression in CIA synovial tissue were determined by 
immunohistochemistry. The mRNA and protein expression levels of VEGF, Flt-1, 
Flk-1, TNF-α, and INF-γ were detected by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) and 
western blots, respectively.
RESULTS: The IL-35 treatment decreased the AI and the synovial histological 
scores of CIA mice. Immunohistochemistry results revealed that the IL-35 
treatment downregulated VEGF, Flt-1, Flk-1, and vWF expression in the CIA mice. 
RT-PCR results showed that the IL-35-treated mice had lower levels of VEGF, 
Flt-1, Flk-1, and TNF-α mRNA expression than those of the PBS-treated mice. 
While there was no significant difference in the level of INF-γ mRNA expression 
between IL-35-treated and PBS-treated mice. Western blot results showed that the 
IL-35 treatment downregulated the levels of VEGF, Flt-1, Flk-1, and TNF-α in CIA 
mice, but the level of INF-γ was not significantly affected.
CONCLUSION: These findings show that IL-35 may represent a novel therapeutic 
agent for RA, and the probable mechanisms may rely on inhibiting VEGF and its 
receptors Flt-1 and Flk-1.
