Potassium ion (K(+)) channels play an important role in the modulation of 
calcium ion (Ca(2+)) signaling via control of the membrane potential. In 
T-lymphocytes, the voltage-gated K(+) channel, KV1.3, and the 
intermediate-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel, KCa3.1, predominantly 
contribute to K(+) conductance, and are responsible for cell proliferation, 
differentiation, apoptosis and infiltration. Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 
including ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, afflicts more than 0.1% of the 
population worldwide. In the chemically-induced IBD model mouse, an increase in 
KCa3.1 activity was observed in mesenteric lymph node CD4(+) T-lymphocytes, 
concomitant with an upregulation of KCa3.1 and a positive KCa3.1 regulator, 
NDPK-B. Pharmacological blockade of the KCa3.1 K(+) channel by TRAM-34 and/or 
ICA17043 elicited 1) a significant decrease in IBD severity, as assessed by 
diarrhea, visible fecal blood, inflammation and crypt damage of the colon; and 
2) restoration of the expression levels of KCa3.1 and Th1 cytokines in CD4(+) 
T-lymphocytes in the IBD model. Recent studies have indicated the impact of 
K2P5.1 upregulation in T lymphocytes on the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases 
such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple sclerosis. The K2P5.1 K(+) channel is 
therefore highlighted as a potent therapeutic target in managing the 
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. Alternatively, pre-mRNA splicing of ion 
channels is associated with the development and progression of various diseases, 
including autoimmune diseases. Therefore, mRNA-splicing mechanisms underlying 
the transcriptional regulation of K2P5.1 K(+) channels may be a new strategic 
therapeutic target for autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
