OBJECTIVES: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a heterogenic and systemic autoimmune 
disease characterized by synovitis and joint structural damage. However, the 
pathogenesis of RA is still obscure. It has been reported microRNA-20a 
(miRNA-20a) was significantly associated with the regulation of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines release in RA FLS. The purpose of this study was to explore the 
function and underlying mechanisms of miRNA-20a on NLRP3-inflammasome in 
adjuvant-induced arthritis (AA) fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) in vitro.
METHODS: In this study, using a combination of Western blotting, Q-PCR, and 
ELISA analysis, we investigated the influence and function of miRNA-20a on 
NLRP3-inflammasome by targeting TXNIP in AA FLSs.
RESULTS: In the present study, the expression of NLRP3-inflammasome was 
significant up-regulated in AA model in vitro. Our study indicated that silence 
of NLRP3 down-regulated the expression of NLRP3-inflammasome and the secretion 
of IL-1β and MMP-1. Moreover, over-expression of miR-20a decreased formation of 
NLRP3-inflammasome, including NLRP3, ASC and caspase-1, and suppressed the 
secretion of IL-1β and MMP-1, along with down-regulated the expressions of TXNIP 
in primary FLSs isolated from AA. With the combined use of prediction programs 
and luciferase assay, the rat TXNIP mRNA 3'UTR predicted to be targeted by 
miR-20a. Similarly, inhibitor TXNIP expression by TXNIP-siRNA markedly repressed 
formation of NLRP3-inflammasome and the secretion of IL-1β and MMP-1.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, these results indicate that miR-20a may play a 
pivotal role in the NLRP3-inflammasome by targeted inhibit TXNIP expression in 
AA FLSs.

Copyright © 2016 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS. 
All rights reserved.
