Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease. We previously 
identified a circulating cell population, fibrocytes, which is activated early 
in disease. As RA is characterized by the formation of autoantibodies and 
autoreactive T cells, which often precede symptom onset, the objective of these 
studies was to characterize fibrocyte activation in the context of T cell 
activation. Multidimensional flow cytometry was used to characterize the 
activation status of peripheral blood (PB) fibrocytes and T cells derived from 
RA patients with different levels of disease activity. Compared to healthy 
controls, fibrocytes from RA patients exhibited increased activation, denoted as 
elevated levels of phosphorylation of STAT3 and NF-κB. RA patients had higher 
numbers of circulating activated Th17 cells and Tregs compared with healthy 
controls, Th17 cell numbers being higher in patients with moderate to high 
disease activity. Additionally, increased numbers of FOXP3+ RORγt+ double 
positive CD4+ T cells were observed in RA patients with more severe disease. Our 
data confirm that circulating fibrocytes are expanded in RA and that there is a 
direct correlation between the increase in number of activated fibrocytes and 
increased number of CD4+ T cells. Moreover, our data suggest that interactions 
between circulating fibrocytes and activated T cells may promote disease 
activity. Specifically, we provide in vitro evidence that mouse-derived CD4+ T 
cells produce GM-CSF which induces fibrocyte proliferation. In turn, activated 
fibrocytes produce IL-6, promoting Th17 polarization.
