C1q/TNF-related protein 3 (CTRP3) is a secreted hormone that modulates hepatic 
glucose and lipid metabolism. Its circulating levels are reduced in human and 
rodent models of obesity, a metabolic state accompanied by chronic low-grade 
inflammation. Recent studies have demonstrated an anti-inflammatory role for 
recombinant CTRP3 in attenuating LPS-induced systemic inflammation, and its 
deficiency markedly exacerbates inflammation in a mouse model of rheumatoid 
arthritis. We used genetic mouse models to explore the immunomodulatory function 
of CTRP3 in response to acute (LPS challenge) and chronic (high-fat diet) 
inflammatory stimuli. In a sublethal dose of LPS challenge, neither CTRP3 
deficiency nor its overexpression in transgenic mice had an impact on IL-1β, 
IL-6, TNF-α, or MIP-2 induction at the serum protein or mRNA levels, contrary to 
previous findings based on recombinant CTRP3 administration. In a metabolic 
context, we measured 71 serum cytokine levels in wild-type and CTRP3 transgenic 
mice fed a high-fat diet or a matched control low-fat diet. On a low-fat diet, 
CTRP3 transgenic mice had elevated circulating levels of multiple chemokines 
(CCL11, CXCL9, CXCL10, CCL17, CX3CL1, CCL22 and sCD30). However, when obesity 
was induced with a high-fat diet, CTRP3 transgenic mice had lower circulating 
levels of IL-5, TNF-α, sVEGF2, and sVEGFR3, and a higher level of soluble gp130. 
Contingent upon the metabolic state, CTRP3 overexpression altered chemokine 
levels in lean mice, and attenuated systemic inflammation in the setting of 
obesity and insulin resistance. These results highlight a context-dependent 
immunomodulatory role for CTRP3.

© 2016 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. 
on behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.
