TIPE2, also known as TNFAIP8L2, a member of the tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha-induced protein-8 (TNFAIP8) family, is known as an inhibitor in 
inflammation and cancer, and its overexpression induces cell death. We examined 
the role of TIPE2 with respect to adjuvant arthritis (AA)-associated 
pathogenesis by analyzing the TIPE2 regulation of death receptor (DR5)-mediated 
apoptosis in vitro. The results showed that TIPE2 was detected in normal 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs), but scarcely observed in AA-FLSs. 
Therefore, recombinant MIGR1/TIPE2(+/+) and control MIGR1 lentivirus vectors 
were transfected to AA-FLSs, which were denoted as TIPE2(+/+)-FLSs and 
MIGR1-FLSs, respectively. Our results showed that TIPE2(+/+)-FLSs were highly 
susceptible to ZF1-mediated apoptosis, and ZF1 was our own purification of an 
anti-DR5 single chain variable fragment antibody. Under the presence of TIPE2, 
the expression of DR5 was significantly increased compared with that of the 
MIGR1-FLS group. In contrast, the level of phosphorylated nuclear factor-kappa B 
(pNF-κB) was lower in the TIPE2(+/+)-FLS group treated with ZF1, whereas the 
activity of caspase was higher. Moreover, the rate of apoptosis in the 
TIPE2(+/+)-FLS group, which was pretreated with caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK, was 
significantly decreased. In contrast, the apoptosis occurrence in the MIGR1-FLS 
group increased significantly with the pretreatment of the NF-κB inhibitor Bay. 
These results indicated that TIPE2 increased the apoptosis of AA-FLSs by 
enhancing DR5 expression levels, thereby promoting the activation of caspase and 
inhibiting the activation of NF-κB in AA-FLSs. TIPE2 might potentially act as a 
therapeutic target for rheumatoid arthritis.
