The B7 family-related protein, V-set and Ig domain (VSIG4) / Z39Ig / complement 
receptor immunoglobulin (CRIg), is a new player in the regulation of immunity to 
infection and inflammation. The unique features of this receptor as compared 
with classical complement receptors, CR3 and CR4, have heralded the emergence of 
new concepts in the regulation of innate and adaptive immunity. Its selective 
expression in tissue macrophages and dendritic cells has been considered of 
importance in host defence and in maintaining tolerance against self-antigens. 
Although a major receptor for phagocytosis of complement opsonised bacteria, its 
array of emerging functions which incorporates the immune suppressive and 
anti-inflammatory action of the receptor have now been realised. Accumulating 
evidence from mouse experimental models indicates a potential role for CRIg in 
protection against bacterial infection and inflammatory diseases, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis, type 1 diabetes and systemic lupus erythematosus, and also 
in promotion of tumour growth. CRIg expression can be considered as a control 
point in these diseases, through which inflammatory mediators, including 
cytokines, act. The ability of CRIg to suppress cytotoxic T cell proliferation 
and function may underlie its promotion of cancer growth. Thus, the unique 
properties of this receptor open up new avenues for understanding of the 
pathways that regulate inflammation during infection, autoimmunity and cancer 
with the potential for new drug targets to be identified. While some complement 
receptors may be differently expressed in mice and humans, as well as displaying 
different properties, mouse CRIg has a structure and function similar to the 
human receptor, suggesting that extrapolation to human diseases is appropriate. 
Furthermore, there is emerging evidence in human conditions that CRIg may be a 
valuable biomarker in infection and immunity, inflammatory conditions and cancer 
prognosis.
