Cachectic rheumatoid arthritis, the less frequent form of the disease, is 
associated with loss of fat mass and often more severe course of the disease. 
Its experimental model represents rat adjuvant arthritis (AA) characterized by 
edema, lack of appetite, sharp body weight and fat loss. As individual fat 
depots display functional differences, here we studied lipolytic activity and 
sensitivity to lipolytic stimuli of nodeless epididymal fat (eWAT) and perinodal 
mesenteric fat (mWAT) depots at the peak of AA. We also examined changes in 
catecholamine and cytokine levels involved in lipolysis in plasma and/or 
isolated adipocytes from both WATs to identify the contribution of local, 
adipocyte-based processes and/or systemic events to adiposity loss in cachectic 
rheumatoid arthritis. AA was induced to male Lewis rats by complete Freund's 
adjuvant. Groups of ad libitum-fed and pair-fed controls were used to 
distinguish the effects of food restriction from inflammation-induced cachexia. 
Adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL), hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) and its 
phosphorylated form (pHSL) were analyzed by western blot. CRP and catecholamine 
levels in plasma or adipocyte lysates were determined using ELISA kits. 
Cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant-1 (CINC-1/CXCL1), monocyte 
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1/CCL2), IL-1Î², IL-6, IL-10 and leptin in 
adipocyte lysate were analyzed by quantitative protein microarray. Plasma 
glycerol and FFA were measured spectrophotometrically. AA rats developed severe 
cachexia, with lower adiposity in mWAT compared to normal and pair-fed controls, 
whereas in eWAT the adiposity was similarly reduced in AA and pair-fed groups. 
ATGL levels in both WATs were not affected by AA or pair feeding. AA upregulated 
levels of HSL, pHSL and pHSL/HSL ratio in mWAT, whereas none of these parameters 
has changed in eWAT of AA rats or in either WATs of pair-fed rats. In AA rats 
plasma glycerol was elevated, whereas FFA concentration was reduced. Plasma 
norepinephrine and epinephrine were increased in AA compared with both groups of 
controls. In eWAT adipocytes, AA but not pair feeding, upregulated 
norepinephrine levels. In mWAT adipocytes, AA rats showed higher epinephrine 
levels than pair-fed controls. Leptin levels in both WATs were depleted in AA 
animals in accordance with body weight loss. None of the measured cytokines in 
eWAT and mWAT was enhanced. Our results demonstrate augmented lipolytic activity 
in mWAT and not eWAT during cachectic arthritis. The adipocyte-derived cytokines 
do not seem to contribute to activated lipolysis. We first demonstrated enhanced 
presence of norepinephrine in perinodal adipocytes that may contribute to the 
regulation of local lipolytic activity by auto/paracrine fashion and thus 
provide independent fuel supply to activated lymph nodes.
