The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of interleukin-1β 
(IL-1β) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) gene co-silencing in mouse gastric 
cancer (GC) cells. Respectively, three pairs of liposome-encapsulated IL-1β and 
TNFα small interfering RNA (siRNA) were transfected into the mouse GC cell line 
MFC. The most effective siRNA, as identified by reverse transcription-polymerase 
chain reaction, was used for co-suppression of IL-1β and TNFα genes. The 
activities of cell proliferation, colony formation and migration were determined 
by the Cell Counting Kit 8 method, colony formation assay and Transwell assay, 
respectively. Protein array analysis was performed to identify the 
differentially expressed factors. The possible signaling pathways of the various 
factors targeting the genes were identified by pathway enrichment analysis using 
KOBAS 2.0. siRNA1 and siRNAc were the most effective interference sequences for 
IL-1β and TNFα, respectively. Following co-transfection of siRNA1 and siRNAc, 
the expression of IL-1β and TNFα was inhibited at the mRNA and protein levels, 
and the cell proliferation, colony forming and migration abilities were reduced 
(P<0.05). The expression of inflammatory factors, including chemokine ligand 5, 
cyclooxygenase-2, IL-6, transforming growth factor β, IL-17A, matrix 
metallopeptidase 9 and stromal cell-derived factor 1α were also inhibited 
(P<0.05). These factors are mainly involved in the rheumatoid arthritis pathway, 
the intestinal immune network for IgA production, the TNF signaling pathway and 
the inflammatory bowel disease pathway. IL-1β and TNFα gene silencing inhibits 
the proliferation and migration of MFC. The mechanisms may involve multiple 
inflammatory factors that participate in the signaling pathways of tumor tissue 
inflammation, the immune network and TNF.
