Sclerostin, an inhibitor of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway, has anti-anabolic effects 
on bone formation by negatively regulating osteoblast differentiation. Mutations 
in the human sclerostin gene (SOST) lead to sclerosteosis with progressive 
skeletal overgrowth, whereas sclerostin-deficient (Sost(-/-)) mice exhibit 
increased bone mass and strength. Therefore, antibody-mediated inhibition of 
sclerostin is currently being clinically evaluated for the treatment of 
postmenopausal osteoporosis in humans. We report that in chronic TNFα (tumor 
necrosis factor α)-dependent arthritis, fibroblast-like synoviocytes constitute 
a major source of sclerostin and that either the lack of sclerostin or its 
antibody-mediated inhibition leads to an acceleration of rheumatoid arthritis 
(RA)-like disease in human TNFα transgenic (hTNFtg) mice with enhanced pannus 
formation and joint destruction. Inhibition of sclerostin also failed to improve 
clinical signs and joint destruction in the partially TNFα-dependent 
glucose-6-phosphate isomerase-induced arthritis mouse model, but ameliorated 
disease severity in K/BxN serum transfer-induced arthritis mouse model, which is 
independent of TNF receptor signaling, thus suggesting a specific role for 
sclerostin in TNFα signaling. Sclerostin effectively blocked TNFα- but not 
interleukin-1-induced activation of p38, a key step in arthritis development, 
pointing to a previously unrealized protective role of sclerostin in 
TNF-mediated chronic inflammation. The possibility of anti-sclerostin antibody 
treatment worsening clinical RA outcome under chronic TNFα-dependent 
inflammatory conditions in mice means that caution should be taken both when 
considering such treatment for inflammatory bone loss in RA and when using 
anti-sclerostin antibodies in patients with TNFα-dependent comorbidities.
