BACKGROUND: The adaptive immune response in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is 
influenced by an interaction between host genetics and environment, particularly 
the host microbiome. Association of the gut microbiota with various diseases has 
been reported, though the specific components of the microbiota that affect the 
host response leading to disease remain unknown. However, there is limited 
information on the role of gut microbiota in RA. In this study we aimed to 
define a microbial and metabolite profile that could predict disease status. In 
addition, we aimed to generate a humanized model of arthritis to confirm the 
RA-associated microbe.
METHODS: To identify an RA biomarker profile, the 16S ribosomal DNA of fecal 
samples from RA patients, first-degree relatives (to rule out 
environment/background as confounding factors), and random healthy non-RA 
controls were sequenced. Analysis of metabolites and their association with 
specific taxa was performed to investigate a potential mechanistic link. The 
role of an RA-associated microbe was confirmed using a human epithelial cell 
line and a humanized mouse model of arthritis.
RESULTS: Patients with RA exhibited decreased gut microbial diversity compared 
with controls, which correlated with disease duration and autoantibody levels. A 
taxon-level analysis suggested an expansion of rare taxa, Actinobacteria, with a 
decrease in abundant taxa in patients with RA compared with controls. Prediction 
models based on the random forests algorithm suggested that three genera, 
Collinsella, Eggerthella, and Faecalibacterium, segregated with RA. The 
abundance of Collinsella correlated strongly with high levels of 
alpha-aminoadipic acid and asparagine as well as production of the 
proinflammatory cytokine IL-17A. A role for Collinsella in altering gut 
permeability and disease severity was confirmed in experimental arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest dysbiosis in RA patients resulting from 
the abundance of certain rare bacterial lineages. A correlation between the 
intestinal microbiota and metabolic signatures could determine a predictive 
profile for disease causation and progression.
