A previous study that investigated the effect of ultrasound (US) on the 
transdermal permeation of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug diclofenac 
found that therapeutic US can increase circulation in an inflamed joint and 
decrease arthritic pain. Transdermal drug delivery has recently been 
demonstrated by US combined with microbubbles (MB) contrast agent (henceforth 
referred to as "US-MB"). The present study evaluated the efficacy of 
US-MB-mediated diclofenac delivery for treating adjuvant-induced rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) in rats. RA was induced by injecting 100 μL of complete Freund's 
adjuvant into the ankle joint of male Sprague-Dawley rats (250-300 g) that were 
randomly divided into five treatment groups: (i) carbopol gel alone (the control 
[group C]), (ii) diclofenac-carbopol gel (group D), (iii) US plus carbopol gel 
(group U), (iv) US plus diclofenac-carbopol gel (group DU) and (v) US-MB plus 
diclofenac-carbopol gel (group DUB). The ankle width was measured over 10 d 
using high-frequency (40-MHz) US B-mode and color Doppler-mode imaging, covering 
the period before and after treatment. Longitudinal US images of the induced RA 
showed synovitis and neovascularity. Only a small amount of neovascularity was 
observed after treatment. The recovery rate on day 10 was significantly higher 
in group DUB (97.7% ± 2.7%, mean ± standard deviation [SD]) than in groups C 
(1.0% ± 2.7%), D (37.5% ± 4.6%), U (75.5% ± 4.2%) and DU (87.3% ± 5.2%) 
(p < 0.05). The results obtained indicate that combining US and MB can increase 
the skin permeability and thereby enhance the delivery of diclofenac sodium gel 
and thereby inhibit inflammation of the tissues surrounding the arthritic ankle. 
Color Doppler-mode imaging revealed that US-MB treatment induced a rapid 
reduction in synovial neoangiogenesis in the arthritic area.

Copyright © 2016 World Federation for Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
