BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a multifactorial autoimmune disease, 
which is characterized by inflammation of synovial joints leading to the 
destruction of cartilage and bone. Infiltrating mast cells can be found within 
the inflamed synovial tissue, however their role in disease pathogenesis is 
unclear. Therefore we have studied the role of mast cells during different 
phases of experimental arthritis.
METHODS: We induced collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), the most frequently used 
animal model of arthritis, in an inducible mast cell knock-out mouse and 
determined the effect of mast cell depletion on the development and severity of 
arthritis.
RESULTS: Depletion of mast cells in established arthritis did not affect 
clinical outcome. However, depletion of mast cells during the preclinical phase 
resulted in a significant reduction in arthritis. This reduction coincided with 
a decrease in circulating CD4(+) T cells and inflammatory monocytes but not in 
the collagen-specific antibody levels. Mast cell depletion resulted in reduced 
levels of IL-6 and IL-17 in serum. Furthermore, stimulation of splenocytes from 
mast cell-depleted mice with collagen type II resulted in reduced levels of 
IL-17 and enhanced production of IL-10.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we show that mast cells contribute to the preclinical phase of 
CIA. Depletion of mast cells before disease onset resulted in an altered 
collagen-specific T cell and cytokine response. These data may suggest that mast 
cells play a role in the regulation of the adaptive immune response during the 
development of arthritis.
