Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease characterized by synovial 
hyperplasia and progressive joint destruction. As reported previously, 
recombinant human endostatin (rhEndostatin) is associated with inhibition of 
joint bone destruction present in rat adjuvant-induced arthritis; however, the 
effect of rhEndostatin on bone destruction is not known. This study was designed 
to assess the inhibitory effect and mechanisms of rhEndostatin on formation and 
function of osteoclasts in vitro, and to gain insight into the mechanism 
underlying the inhibitory effect of bone destruction. Bone marrow-derived 
macrophages isolated from BALB/c mice were stimulated with receptor activator of 
NF-κB ligand (RANKL) and macrophage colony-stimulating factor to establish 
osteoclast formation. Osteoclast formation was determined by TRAP staining. Cell 
viability of BMMs affected by rhEndostatin was determined using a MTT assay. 
Bone resorption was examined with a bone resorption pits assay. The expression 
of osteoclast-specific markers was analyzed using quantitative real-time PCR. 
The related signaling pathways were examined using a Luciferase reporter assay 
and western blot analysis. Indeed, rhEndostatin showed a significant reduction 
in the number of osteoclast-like cells and early-stage bone resorption. 
Moreover, molecular analysis demonstrated that rhEndostatin attenuated 
RANKL-induced NF-κB signaling by inhibiting the phosphorylation of IκBα and 
NF-κB p65 nuclear translocation. Furthermore, rhEndostatin significantly 
inhibited the activation of RANKL-dependent mitogen-activated protein kinases, 
such as ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. Hence, we demonstrated for the first time that 
preventing the formation and function of osteoclasts is an important anti-bone 
destruction mechanism of rhEndostatin, which might be useful in the prevention 
and treatment of bone destruction in RA.
