AIM: The principle objective of the study was to explore the anti-arthritic 
properties of Acmella uliginosa (AU) (Sw.) Cass. flower in a rat model and to 
identify potential anti-inflammatory compounds derived from flower extracts. The 
synergistic role played by a combination of AU flower and Aloe vera (AV) gel 
crude extracts was also investigated.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Wistar rats induced with Freund's complete adjuvant 
(FCA) were used as a disease model of arthritic paw swelling. There were three 
experimental and two control groups, each consisting of five rats. Paw 
circumference and serum biochemical parameters were evaluated to investigate the 
role of the flower extracts in disease amelioration through a feeding schedule 
spanning 21 days. Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) analyses were 
performed to search for the presence of anti-inflammatory compounds in the 
ethanolic and n-hexane solvent extracts of the flower.
RESULTS: As a visual cue to the experimental outcomes, FCA-induced paw swelling 
decreased to the normal level; and hemoglobin, serum protein, and albumin levels 
were significantly increased in the treated animals. The creatinine level was 
estimated to be normal in the experimental rats after the treatment. The 
combination of AU and AV showed the best recovery potential in all the studied 
parameters, confirming the synergistic efficacy of the herbal formulation. GC/MS 
analyses revealed the presence of at least 5 anti-inflammatory compounds 
including 9-octadecenoic acid (Z)-, phenylmethyl ester, astaxanthin, 
Ã -N-Normethadol, fenretinide that have reported anti-inflammatory/anti-arthritic 
properties.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicated that the crude flower homogenate of AU 
contains potential anti-inflammatory compounds which could be used as an 
anti-inflammatory/anti-arthritic medication.
