Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory disorder of the joints that affects 
0.5-1 % of adults. Excessive growth of the fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) 
promotes hyperplasia of synovial tissues and causes its invasion into the bone 
and cartilage, which eventually causes deformity and dysfunction of affected 
joints. Interleukin 35 (IL-35) was shown to suppress the inflammatory responses 
to collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) via upregulation of T regulatory cells and 
suppression of T helper type 17 cells in a mouse model. To study the effects of 
IL-35 on the proliferation and apoptosis frequency of cultured FLS isolated from 
mice with CIA as well as to examine the effects of IL-35 on CIA in vivo. Thirty 
DBA/1 J mice, which are used as an animal model for RA, were divided randomly 
(ten mice per group) to a CIA group (collagen treatment), a CIA + IL-35 group 
(collagen and IL-35 treatments), and a control group (no treatment). Starting on 
the 24th day after collagen administration, IL-35 was injected intraperitoneally 
into mice of the CIA + IL-35 group once per day for 10 days. An arthritis index 
was calculated, and pathological analysis of synovial tissue was performed. FLS 
isolated from CIA mice were treated with various concentrations of IL-35 
(12.5-100 ng/ml). The MTT assay was used to examine FLS proliferation, and 
apoptosis frequency of FLS was detected by flow cytometry. On day 24, the CIA 
mice began to exhibit arthritis symptoms, and the symptoms rapidly progressed 
with time. Treatment with IL-35 significantly alleviated arthritis symptoms and 
reduced the synovial tissue inflammation. In addition, IL-35 treatment inhibited 
proliferation and promoted apoptosis in cultured FLS from CIA mice in a 
dose-dependent manner. IL-35 could ameliorate the symptoms of arthritis in the 
CIA mouse model in vivo and inhibited FLS proliferation while promoting FLS 
apoptosis in vitro, thereby exhibited the potential in inhibiting the 
progression of RA.
