Macrophages play crucial roles in combatting infectious disease by promoting 
inflammation and phagocytosis. Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (ANGPTL2) is a 
secreted factor that induces tissue inflammation by attracting and activating 
macrophages to produce inflammatory cytokines in chronic inflammation-associated 
diseases such as obesity-associated metabolic syndrome, atherosclerosis, and 
rheumatoid arthritis. Here, we asked whether and how ANGPTL2 activates 
macrophages in the innate immune response. ANGPTL2 was predominantly expressed 
in proinflammatory mouse bone marrow-derived differentiated macrophages 
(GM-BMMs) following GM-CSF treatment relative to anti-inflammatory cells 
(M-BMMs) established by M-CSF treatment. Expression of the proinflammatory 
markers IL-1β, IL-12p35, and IL-12p40 significantly decreased in GM-BMMs from 
Angptl2-deficient compared with wild-type (WT) mice, suggestive of attenuated 
proinflammatory activity. We also report that ANGPTL2 inflammatory signaling is 
transduced through integrin α5β1 rather than through paired immunoglobulin-like 
receptor B. Interestingly, Angptl2-deficient mice were more susceptible to 
infection with Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium than were WT mice. 
Moreover, nitric oxide (NO) production by Angptl2-deficient GM-BMMs was 
significantly lower than in WT GM-BMMs. Collectively, our findings suggest that 
macrophage-derived ANGPTL2 promotes an innate immune response in those cells by 
enhancing proinflammatory activity and NO production required to fight 
infection.
