Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), a rate-limiting enzyme for the synthesis of 
catecholamines, is expressed in T lymphocytes. However, the role of T 
cell-expressed TH in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is less clear. Herein, we aimed 
to show the contribution of TH expression by CD4+ T cells to alleviation of 
helper T (Th)17/regulatory T (Treg) imbalance in collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA), a mouse model of RA. CIA was prepared by intradermal injection of 
collagen type II (CII) at tail base of DBA1/J mice. Expression of TH in the 
spleen and the ankle joints was measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction 
and Western blot analysis. Percentages of TH-expressing Th17 and Treg cells in 
splenic CD4+ T cells were determined by flow cytometry. Overexpression and 
knockdown of TH gene in CD4+ T cells were taken to evaluate effects of TH on 
Th17 and Treg cells in CIA. TH expression was upregulated in both the inflamed 
tissues (spleen and ankle joints) and the CD4+ T cells of CIA mice. In splenic 
CD4+ T cells, the cells expressing TH were increased during CIA. These cells 
that expressed more TH in CIA were mainly Th17 cells rather than Treg cells. TH 
gene overexpression in CD4+ T cells from CIA mice reduced Th17 cell percentage 
as well as Th17-related transcription factor and cytokine expression and 
secretion, whereas TH gene knockdown enhanced the Th17 cell activity. In 
contrast, TH gene overexpression increased Treg-related cytokine expression and 
secretion in CD4+ T cells of CIA mice, while TH gene knockdown decreased the 
Treg cell changes. Collectively, these findings show that CIA induces TH 
expression in CD4+ T cells, particularly in Th17 cells, and suggest that the 
increased TH expression during CIA represents an anti-inflammatory mechanism.
