Calponin is an actin cytoskeleton-associated protein that regulates 
motility-based cellular functions. Three isoforms of calponin are present in 
vertebrates, among which calponin 2 encoded by the Cnn2 gene is expressed in 
multiple types of cells, including blood cells from the myeloid lineage. Our 
previous studies demonstrated that macrophages from Cnn2 knockout (KO) mice 
exhibit increased migration and phagocytosis. Intrigued by an observation that 
monocytes and macrophages from patients with rheumatoid arthritis had increased 
calponin 2, we investigated anti-glucose-6-phosphate isomerase serum-induced 
arthritis in Cnn2-KO mice for the effect of calponin 2 deletion on the 
pathogenesis and pathology of inflammatory arthritis. The results showed that 
the development of arthritis was attenuated in systemic Cnn2-KO mice with 
significantly reduced inflammation and bone erosion than that in age- and stain 
background-matched C57BL/6 wild-type mice. In vitro differentiation of calponin 
2-null mouse bone marrow cells produced fewer osteoclasts with decreased bone 
resorption. The attenuation of inflammatory arthritis was confirmed in 
conditional myeloid cell-specific Cnn2-KO mice. The increased phagocytotic 
activity of calponin 2-null macrophages may facilitate the clearance of 
autoimmune complexes and the resolution of inflammation, whereas the decreased 
substrate adhesion may reduce osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption. The data 
suggest that calponin 2 regulation of cytoskeleton function plays a novel role 
in the pathogenesis of inflammatory arthritis, implicating a potentially 
therapeutic target.
