BACKGROUND: The Mouse Genomes Project is an ongoing collaborative effort to 
sequence the genomes of the common laboratory mouse strains. In 2011, the 
initial analysis of sequence variation across 17 strains found 56.7 M unique 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 8.8 M indels. We carry out deep 
sequencing of 13 additional inbred strains (BUB/BnJ, C57BL/10J, C57BR/cdJ, 
C58/J, DBA/1J, I/LnJ, KK/HiJ, MOLF/EiJ, NZB/B1NJ, NZW/LacJ, RF/J, SEA/GnJ and 
ST/bJ), cataloguing molecular variation within and across the strains. These 
strains include important models for immune response, leukaemia, age-related 
hearing loss and rheumatoid arthritis. We now have several examples of fully 
sequenced closely related strains that are divergent for several disease 
phenotypes.
RESULTS: Approximately 27.4 M unique SNPs and 5 M indels are identified across 
these strains compared to the C57BL/6 J reference genome (GRCm38). The amount of 
variation found in the inbred laboratory mouse genome has increased to 71 M SNPs 
and 12 M indels. We investigate the genetic basis of highly penetrant cancer 
susceptibility in RF/J finding private novel missense mutations in DNA damage 
repair and highly cancer associated genes. We use two highly related strains 
(DBA/1J and DBA/2J) to investigate the genetic basis of collagen-induced 
arthritis susceptibility.
CONCLUSIONS: This paper significantly expands the catalogue of fully sequenced 
laboratory mouse strains and now contains several examples of highly genetically 
similar strains with divergent phenotypes. We show how studying private missense 
mutations can lead to insights into the genetic mechanism for a highly penetrant 
phenotype.
