The objective of this study was to evaluate the potential therapeutic effects of 
betahistine dihydrochloride (betahistine) in a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
mouse model. CIA was induced in DBA/1 male mice by primary immunization with 
100μl of emulsion containing 2mg/ml chicken type II collagen (CII) mixed with 
complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) in an 1:1 ratio, and booster immunization with 
100μl of emulsion containing 2mg/ml CII mixed with incomplete Freund's adjuvant 
(IFA) in an 1:1 ratio. Immunization was performed subcutaneously at the base of 
the tail. After being boosted on day 21, betahistine (1 and 5mg/kg) was orally 
administered daily for 2weeks. The severity of CIA was determined by arthritic 
scores and assessment of histopathological joint destruction. Expression of 
cytokines in the paw and anti-CII antibodies in the serum was evaluated by 
ELISA. The proliferative response against CII in the lymph node cells was 
measured by (3)H-thymidine incorporation assay. The frequencies of different CII 
specific CD4(+) T cell subsets in the lymph node were determined by 
flow-cytometric analysis. Betahistine treatment attenuated the severity of 
arthritis and reduced the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α, 
IL-6, IL-23 and IL-17A, in the paw tissues of CIA mice. Lymph node cells from 
betahistine-treated mice showed a decrease in proliferation, as well as a lower 
frequency of Th17 cells. In vitro, betahistine suppressed CD4(+) T cell 
differentiation into Th17 cells. These results indicate that betahistine is 
effective in suppressing both inflammatory and Th17 responses in mouse CIA and 
that it may have therapeutic value as an adjunct treatment for rheumatoid 
arthritis.
