To investigate the expression of hypoxia inducible factor (HIF-1α) and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in the synovium of collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) joint, and whether the PI3K pathway regulates angiogenesis in rheumatoid 
arthritis or not. A randomized controlled according to the principle of the rats 
were divided into normal control group (10 rats) and the experimental group (40 
rats). The experimental group rats were established as type II collagen plus 
adjuvant Freund's complete adjuvant-induced arthritis model. HIF-1α and VEGF 
proteins' expression in serum of CIA rats group and normal control group were 
detected by ELISA. Microvessel density (MVD) in synovial tissue of CIA rats 
group and normal control group were detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC) 
staining. The protein expression of PTEN, PI3K, and AKT in synovial tissue were 
detected by Western Blot. Compared with normal control group, toes and ankle 
swelling and arthritis index (AI) of CIA rat increased, and the expression of 
VEGF and HIF-1α proteins in peripheral serum increased, IHC showed that MVD was 
significantly higher than that of the control group, and the difference was 
statistically significant (p<0.05). Western Blot results showed that PI3K and 
AKT proteins expression in CIA synovial tissue of rats increased, while the 
expression of PTEN protein decreased. Correlation analysis showed that VEGF and 
HIF-1 levels in the peripheral serum of CIA rats were positively correlated with 
arthritis index (AI); the contents of HIF-1α and VEGF in the peripheral serum of 
CIA rats were positively correlated with MVD in synovium tissue. The CIA rat 
model regulated the expression of HIF-1α and VEGF proteins in peripheral serum 
by PI3K signaling pathway, and then regulated neovascularization in RA.
