BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) are an important class of widespread 
molecules involved in diverse biological functions, which are exceptionally 
expressed in numerous types of diseases. Currently, limited study on LncRNA in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is available. In this study, we aimed to identify the 
specifically expressed LncRNA that are relevant to adjuvant-induced arthritis 
(AA) in rats, and to explore the possible molecular mechanisms of RA 
pathogenesis.
METHODS: To identify LncRNAs specifically expressed in rheumatoid arthritis, the 
expression of LncRNAs in synoviums of rats from the model group (n=3) was 
compared with that in the control group (n=3) using Arraystar Rat LncRNA/mRNA 
microarray and real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Up to 260 LncRNAs were found to be differentially expressed 
(â‰¥1.5-fold-change) in the synoviums between AA model and the normal rats (170 
up-regulated and 90 down-regulated LncRNAs in AA rats compared with normal 
rats). Coding-non-coding gene co-expression networks (CNC network) were drawn 
based on the correlation analysis between the differentially expressed LncRNAs 
and mRNAs. Six LncRNAs, XR_008357, U75927, MRAK046251, XR_006457, DQ266363 and 
MRAK003448, were selected to analyze the relationship between LncRNAs and RA via 
the CNC network and GO analysis. Real-time PCR result confirmed that the six 
LncRNAs were specifically expressed in the AA rats.
CONCLUSIONS: These results revealed that clusters of LncRNAs were uniquely 
expressed in AA rats compared with controls, which manifests that these 
differentially expressed LncRNAs in AA rats might play a vital role in RA 
development. Up-regulation or down-regulation of the six LncRNAs might 
contribute to the molecular mechanism underlying RA. To sum up, our study 
provides potential targets for treatment of RA and novel profound understanding 
of the pathogenesis of RA.
