Extracellular RNA (exRNA) has been characterized as a molecular alarm signal 
upon cellular stress or tissue injury and to exert biological functions as a 
proinflammatory, prothrombotic, and vessel permeability-regulating factor. In 
this study, we investigated the contribution of exRNA and its antagonist RNase1 
in a chronic inflammatory joint disease, rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Upon 
immunohistochemical inspection of RA, osteoarthritis (OA), and psoriatic 
arthritis synovium, exRNA was detectable only in the RA synovial lining layer, 
whereas extracellular DNA was detectable in various areas of synovial tissue. In 
vitro, exRNA (150-5000 nt) was released by RA synovial fibroblasts (RASF) under 
hypoxic conditions but not under normoxia or TNF-Î± treatment. RNase activity was 
increased in synovial fluid from RA and OA patients compared with psoriatic 
arthritis patients, whereas RNase activity of RASF and OASF cultures was not 
altered by hypoxia. Reduction of exRNA by RNase1 treatment decreased adhesion of 
RASF to cartilage, but it had no influence on their cell proliferation or 
adhesion to endothelial cells. In vivo, treatment with RNase1 reduced RASF 
invasion into coimplanted cartilage in the SCID mouse model of RA. We also 
analyzed the expression of neuropilins in synovial tissue and SF, as they may 
interact with vascular endothelial growth factor signaling and exRNA. The data 
support the concepts that the exRNA/RNase1 system participates in RA 
pathophysiology and that RASF are influenced by exRNA in a prodestructive 
manner.
