New folic acid (FA) coupled three layered micelles (3LM) were designed to 
encapsulate DNA, and their application as delivery system that specifically 
targets activated macrophages was investigated for new treatment options in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). FA coupled poly(l-lactide)-b-poly(ethylene glycol) 
(FA-PEG-PLLA) was synthesized via the NHS-ester activated/amine coupling method. 
Fluorescein labeled folic acid was used for flow cytometric detection of the 
expression of functional folic receptor Î² in LPS-activated and resting 
macrophages. FA coupled 3LM were formulated in a two-step procedure and 
characterized regarding hydrodynamic diameters and zeta potentials. The presence 
of the targeting ligand was shown not to increase the size of the 3LM compared 
to their non-targeted counterparts. Targeted and non-targeted 3LM were used in 
vitro to optimize uptake conditions in the RAW 264.7 macrophage cell line. The 
amount of FA coupled polymer in the final formulation was found to be optimal at 
75% FA-PEG-PLLA and 25% PLLA-PEG-PLLA. Subsequently, transgene expression in 
vitro in RAW 264.7 cells and ex vivo in primary activated and resting mouse 
macrophages was determined as a function of FR-mediated internalization of 3LM 
encapsulating GFP expressing plasmid. FR-overexpressing activated cells, as 
successfully identified by internalization of FA-fluorescein, showed 
significantly higher GFP expression in vitro and ex vivo than resting 
macrophages with only a basal level of FR expression. Lastly, injectable 
hydrogels as depot formulation were formed by stereocomplexation, and their 
degradation, DNA release profiles, and dissociation into intact 3LM were found 
to be beneficial for potential in vivo application. Our findings confirm that 
FA-3LM are taken up by activated macrophages via folate receptor mediated 
endocytosis and that their hydrogels release intact 3LM for efficient 
transfection of primary macrophages. Therefore, FA-3LM could become a promising 
delivery system for receptor-mediated drug or gene delivery and novel therapy 
for rheumatoid arthritis in an in situ forming gel formulation.
