Reactive oxygen species (ROS) signaling is critical in T helper (Th) cell 
differentiation; however its role in differentiated Th cell functions is 
unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of oxidative stress on the 
effector functions of in vitro differentiated mouse Th17 and Th1 cells or CD4+ T 
cells from patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis using pro-oxidants plumbagin (PB) 
and hydrogen peroxide. We found that in mouse Th cells, non-toxic concentration 
of pro-oxidants inhibited reactivation induced expression of IL-17A in Th17 and 
IFN-γ in Th1 cells by reducing the expression of their respective TFs, RORγt and 
T-bet. Interestingly, in both the subsets, PB increased the expression of IL-4 
by enhancing reactivation induced ERK1/2 phosphorylation. We further 
investigated the cytokine modulatory effect of PB on CD4+ T cells isolated from 
PBMCs of patients with Rheumatoid Arthritis, a well-known Th17 and or Th1 
mediated disease. In human CD4+ T cells from Rheumatoid Arthritis patients, PB 
reduced the frequencies of IL-17A+ (Th17), IFN-γ+ (Th1) and IL-17A+/IFN-γ+ 
(Th17/1) cells and also inhibited the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
TNF-α and IL-6. N-Acetyl Cysteine (NAC) an antioxidant completely reversed PB 
mediated cytokine modulatory effects in both mouse and human cells indicating a 
direct role for ROS. Together our data suggest that oxidative microenvironment 
can alter cytokine response of terminally differentiated cells and thus altering 
intracellular ROS could be a potential way to target Th17 and Th1 cells in 
autoimmune disorders.
