Macrophages play major roles in inflammation, immunity and host defense 
mechanisms. Once activated they produce and release cytokines, oxygen and 
nitrogen species, and eicosanoids. The best characterized stimuli to induce the 
transcription of genes encoding pro-inflammatory proteins in macrophages in 
vitro is bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS could be used alone or in 
combination with recombinant mouse interferon-γ (IFN-γ). Such stimulation 
results in cytokine release and the synthesis of enzymes such as 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). The nitric 
oxide (NO) radical is known to play a central role in inflammatory and immune 
reactions for self-protection. However, the excessive production of NO may lead 
to tissue damage. In inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, 
excessive NO production by activated macrophages has been observed. Adipose 
tissue is composed of various cell types such as mature adipocytes, 
preadipocytes, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, vascular cells, and macrophages. 
Recent studies indicate that obesity is associated with low-grade chronic 
inflammation of adipose tissues, and that such inflammation is one of the 
potential mechanisms leading to the insulin resistance. It has been demonstrated 
that obese adipose tissue is characterized by the increased infiltration of 
macrophages. Therefore, we attempted to identify natural anti-inflammatory 
compounds that not only inhibit the secretion of NO from RAW 264.7 cells, but 
also inhibit triglyceride accumulation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. This review 
describes the NO prpduction inhibitory activity or the TG accumulation 
inhibitory activity of the compounds obtained from 18 plants and a fungi that 
have been used as traditional medicines.
