Pro-inflammatory mediators including TNF-alpha, IL-6, and nitric oxide are 
important for the regulation of the immune response when an infection is 
present, but when overproduced, it can be responsible for the development of 
tissue and organ injury seen in sepsis, as well as severe asthma, and autoimmune 
diseases such as Crohn's disease and rheumatoid arthritis. Data from our lab to 
characterize the novel compound enaminone E121 have suggested that macrophages 
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) release significantly decreased levels 
of TNF-alpha and IL-6 as measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay as 
compared to the DMSO control group. Additionally, functional experiments in a 
mouse model of asthma have shown that E121 is efficacious in decreasing airway 
hyperresponsiveness. A new set of compounds synthesized in our lab (JODI) have 
an N-aryl piperazino motif incorporated on the aromatic side of the enaminone 
pharmacophore. It was hypothesized that this would enhance their 
immunosuppressive activity as anti-inflammatory agents by also acting as a 
chemokine receptor antagonist. Our studies suggest that JODI appears to suppress 
TNF-alpha and IL-6 in a dose-dependent manner. The JODI compounds were also more 
effective in reducing TNF-alpha after LPS stimulation when compared to 
dexamethasone. Lastly, studies using MCP-1 suggest that the JODI compounds, and 
not E121, are able to block CCR2 signaling as evidenced by decreased total 
ERK1/2. These studies indicate that E121 and its corresponding piperazino 
analogs could act as strong anti-inflammatory agents in asthma or other 
autoimmunities where efficacious therapeutic options are needed.
