INTRODUCTION: Chronic inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and 
periodontitis, cause the bone destruction by promotion of the differentiation of 
monocyte/macrophage lineage cells into mature osteoclasts (OCs) with active 
bone-resorbing character. However, the detailed mechanisms underlying this 
disorder remain unclear. We herein investigated the role of urokinase 
plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) in the bone destruction caused by chronic 
inflammation.
METHODS: We investigated that the effect of uPAR on inflammatory OC formation 
induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in inflammatory diseases.
RESULTS: We found that the LPS more weakly induced OC formation and the 
resultant bone loss in uPAR-deficient mice than in wild-type mice. Additionally, 
we demonstrated that uPAR significantly potentiated LPS-induced OC formation of 
RAW264.7 mouse monocyte/macrophage linage cells in integrin β3/Akt-dependent 
manner. Moreover, we showed that the blocking of uPAR function by the 
administration of anti-uPAR neutralizing antibody significantly attenuated the 
LPS-induced OC formation and the resultant bone loss in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results strongly suggest that uPAR negatively regulates the 
LPS-induced inflammatory OC formation and the resultant bone loss mediated 
through the integrin β3/Akt pathway. Our findings partly clarify the molecular 
mechanisms underlying bone destruction caused by chronic inflammatory diseases, 
and would benefit research on identifying antibody therapy for the treatment of 
these diseases.
