Synovitis is usually observed before loss of articular function in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). In addition to the synovium and according to the 
"Inside-Outside" theory, bone compartment is also involved in RA pathogenesis. 
Then, we investigated time dependent articular bone loss and prediction of early 
bone loss to late arthritis severity on the rat adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) 
model. Lewis female rats were longitudinally monitored from arthritis induction 
(day 0), with early (day 10) and late (day 17) steps. Trabecular and cortical 
microarchitecture parameters of four ankle bones were assessed by microcomputed 
tomography. Gene expression was determined at sacrifice. Arthritis occurred at 
day 10 in AIA rats. At this time, bone erosions were detected on four ankle 
bones, with cortical porosity increase (+67%) and trabecular alterations 
including bone volume fraction (BV/TV: -13%), and trabecular thickness decrease. 
Navicular bone assessment was the most reproducible and sensitive. Furthermore, 
strong correlations were observed between bone alterations at day 10 and 
arthritis severity or bone loss at day 17, including predictability of day 10 
BV/TV to day 17 articular index (R2  = 0.76). Finally, gene expression at day 17 
confirmed massive osteoclast activation and interestingly provided insights on 
strong activation of bone formation inhibitor markers at the joint level. In rat 
AIA, bone loss was already observed at synovitis onset and was predicted late 
arthritis severity. Our results reinforced the key role of subchondral bone in 
arthritis pathogenesis, in favour to the "Inside-Outside" theory. Mechanisms of 
bone loss in rat AIA involved resorption activation and formation inhibition 
changes. J. Cell. Physiol. 232: 1318-1325, 2017. © 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
