ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Capparis spinosa L. originates from dry regions 
of Asia and Mediterranean basin. In traditional medicine of these areas, 
infusions from caper root are considered to be beneficial for the treatment of 
rheumatism, gout and against abdominal pains.
AIM OF THE STUDY: To evaluate the pain relieving properties of a Syrian cultivar 
of Capparis spinosa roots in rat models of osteoarthritis and rheumatoid 
arthritis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Decoction (DEC) and hydroalcoholic extract (EtH2O) were 
obtained from powdered roots; the latter was further separated in CH2Cl2 and 
aqueous (H2O-Res) fractions. The extracts were characterized in terms of 
spermidine alkaloids by HPLC/DAD/MS and stachydrine by NMR. Different amount of 
free and glycosilated forms of capparispine and analogues (from 0.5% w/w for DEC 
up to 7.6% w/w for CH2Cl2 fraction) were detected. Rat models of rheumatoid 
arthritis and osteoarthritis were induced by the intra-articular administration 
of Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA) or monosodium iodoacetate (MIA), 
respectively.
RESULTS: Fourteenth days after CFA or MIA injection, the different preparations 
of Capparis spinosa (3, 30, 100 and 300mgkg-1) were acutely administered p.o.. 
Powdered roots (300mgkg-1), DEC (100mgkg-1), and EtH2O (300mgkg-1) significantly 
reduced hypersensitivity to mechanical noxious stimuli as well as spontaneous 
pain evaluated as hind limb bearing alterations in both models. The CH2Cl2 and 
the H2O-Res (30mgkg-1) were the most potent in reverting pain threshold 
alterations despite the different content of free alkaloids.
CONCLUSIONS: Capparis spinosa extracts relieved pain related to rheumatoid 
arthritis and osteoarthritis after single administration. A synergistic effect 
due to a specific "phytochemical mixture" is suggested.
