1. Anhuienoside C (AC), a triterpenoid saponin derived from the traditional 
Chinese medicine (TCM) "Di Wu", has significant anti-inflammatory and 
anti-rheumatoid arthritis activities. Here we aimed to characterize the 
pharmacokinetics of AC and its deglycosylated metabolites in rats. 2. AC was 
administered to rats by intravenous injection or oral gavage. AC and its four 
deglycosylated metabolites (M1, M2, M3 and M4) in biological samples were 
quantified using a UPLC-QTOF/MS system. The pharmacokinetic data were analyzed 
by compartmental modeling. The metabolism of M1, M2, M3 and M4 was determined 
using rat liver microsomes (RLM) and rat intestine microsomes (RIM). The 
intestinal permeabilities of AC and its metabolites were evaluated using 
Parallel artificial membrane permeability assay (PAMPA) and MDR1-transfected 
Madin-Darby canine kidney cell (MDCK-MDR1) cell model. 3. AC pharmacokinetics 
was well described by the one-compartment model. The oral bioavailability of AC 
was exceedingly low (F = 0.03%). Consistently, AC was poorly distributed 
(< 0.08 μM) in major organs including the heart, liver, spleen, lung and kidney 
after oral uptake. Three of four deglycosylated metabolites (M2, M3, and M4) 
underwent further metabolism in RLM, generating five, two and five oxidized 
products, respectively. Both PAMPA and MDCK-MDR1 experiments showed that AC and 
its metabolites were poorly permeable. Furthermore, the net flux ratios derived 
from MDCK-MDR1 versus wild-type MDCK cells were, respectively 1.3, 1.5, 0.7, 1.2 
and 0.6 for AC, M1, M2, M3 and M4, suggesting that these compounds were 
non-substrates of P-glycoprotein. 4. In conclusion, extensive pre-systemic 
metabolism and poor permeability were the main causes of low systemic exposures 
of oral AC and its four metabolites.
