Macrolides, polyketide natural products, and their 15-membered semi-synthetic 
derivatives are composed of substituted macrocyclic lactone ring and used 
primarily as potent antibiotics. Recently their usefulness was extended to 
antimalarial and anti-inflammatory area. Hybrid macrolides presented in this 
article are the next generation semi-synthetic compounds that combine 
pharmacophores from antibacterial, antimalarial and anti-inflammatory area with 
14- and 15-membered azalide scaffolds. Antibacterial azalide hybrids with 
sulphonamides showed improved activity against resistant streptococci while 
quinolone conjugates demonstrated full coverage of respiratory pathogens 
including macrolide resistant strains and their efficacy was confirmed in mouse 
pneumonia model. Antimalarial macrolide hybrids, mainly involving 
(chloro)quinoline pharmacophores, showed outstanding activity against 
chloroquine resistant strains, favourable pharmacokinetics, promising in vivo 
efficacy as well as encouraging developmental potential. Anti-inflammatory 
hybrids were obtained by combining macrolides with corticosteroid and 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. They were found active in in vivo animal 
models of locally induced inflammation, asthma, inflammatory bowel disease and 
rheumatoid arthritis and demonstrated improved safety over parent steroid drugs. 
Overall, macrolide hybrids possess significant potential to be developed as 
potent novel medicines in therapeutic areas of utmost pharmaceutical interest.

CopyrightÂ© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.
