Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common chronic autoimmune and incurable disease. 
The aim of the present study was to investigate the therapeutic effect and 
mechanism of the total saponins of Rhizoma Dioscorea nipponica (TSRDN) in RA. A 
collagen induced-arthritis (CIA) rat model was established. CIA rats were 
randomly divided into three groups and lavaged with an equal volume of solvent 
(CIA group), TSRDN (25 mg/kg/day, RDN group) and tripterygium (TP; 12 mg/kg/day, 
TP group) for 21 days, respectively. Normal rats served as a control group. 
Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining was used to observe the histopathological injury 
of synovial tissues. The level of CD31, which used for marking and counting, 
micro vessel density (MVD) and the expression levels of vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 
(STAT3) were detected by immunohistochemical analysis. Additionally, the 
DNA-binding activity of nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) was determined using an ELISA 
kit. HE staining showed obvious synovial hyperplasia, inflammatory cell 
infiltration, pannus formation, cartilage and bone erosion in the CIA group 
rats. In addition, compared with control group, the level of MVD, the expression 
of VEGF and STAT3, and the DNA-binding activity of NF-κB were all increased in 
CIA group rat synovial tissue (all P<0.01); however, TSRDN or tripterygium were 
able to inhibit these changes (all P<0.01). It was speculated that TSRDN may 
prevent angiogenesis by inhibiting the expression of STAT3 and the DNA-binding 
activity of NF-κB p65, thereby potentially improving CIA.
