The aim of this study was to examine the therapeutic potential of sulfasalazine 
and prednisolone in a mouse collagen antibody-induced arthritis (CAIA) model. 
Twenty-five male BALB/c mice were randomly divided into five groups: group 1 
(G1): control, group 2 (G2): probe control, group 3 (G3): CAIA, group 4 (G4): 
CAIA+sulfasalazine (10 mg/kg, oral), and group 5 (G5): CAIA+prednisolone (100 
mg/kg, oral). Fluorescence bioimaging was performed in vivo 24 and 48 h after 
treatment with a fluorescence probe (OsteoSenseÂ® 680 EX), and all mice were 
sacrificed. The hind knee joints were fixed in 10% neutral phosphate-buffered 
formalin, and micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) and histopathological 
analyses were performed. The paw thickness increased in a time-dependent manner 
in G3 mice, but trended toward a decrease in both G4 and G5 mice. Fluorescence 
intensity increased in G3 mice at 24 and 48 h after fluorescence probe 
treatment, but the fluorescence intensity in G4 and G5 mice was lower than that 
in G3. Micro-CT analyses showed that the joint surfaces of G3 mice had a rough 
and irregular articular appearance, but the occurrence of these irregularities 
was lower in G4 and G5. Hematoxylin and eosin and Safranin O-fast green staining 
confirmed that destruction of the cartilage and bony structures, synovial 
hyperplasia, and inflammatory cell infiltration all occurred in G3, and that the 
occurrence of these phenomena was lower in G4 and G5 than in G3. Taken together, 
these results suggest that sulfasalazine and prednisolone can reduce acute 
rheumatoid arthritis in mice.
