To evaluate the potential relationship between rheumatoid arthritis and 
arachidonic acid (AA) metabonomics via cyclooxygenase (COX) and lipoxygenase 
(LOX) pathways, a UPLC-MS/MS method has been developed and validated for 
simultaneous and quantitative profiling of eicosanoid metabolome in rat plasma. 
The analytes were extracted from plasma samples by protein precipitation 
procedure, and then separated on a Shim-pack XR-ODS column with mobile phase A 
(0.05% formic acid in water, pH=3.3 adjusted with dilute ammonium hydroxide) and 
mobile phase B [methanol: acetonitrile (20:80, v/v)]. The detection was 
performed on UPLC-MS/MS system with an electro spray ion source in the negative 
ion and multiple reaction-monitoring modes. The developed method was optimized 
to completely separate all twenty-three analytes and three internal standards in 
12min. All standard calibration curves were linear and the calibration 
regression coefficients were ranged from 0.9903 to 0.9992 for all analytes. The 
recoveries of analytes were all more than 60%. By means of the method developed, 
the plasma samples from model rats and normal rats had been successfully 
determined. Results showed that AA and fifteen kinds of metabolites by LOX and 
COX pathways in model rat plasma were significant higher than those in normal 
ones(P<0.05), while 5-HpETE and LTD4 in model rat plasma were significantly 
lower than those in normal ones(P<0.05). The methods demonstrated the changes of 
eicosanoid metabolome occurring in plasma from rat subjects with rheumatoid 
arthritis. It could be a powerful manner to diagnostic and/or prognostic values 
for rheumatoid arthritis.
