Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), a component of omega-3 fatty acids, has been 
reported to protect against inflammatory bone diseases such as osteoporosis and 
rheumatoid arthritis. However, its exact mechanism in bone resorbing cells has 
not been elucidated. In this study, we investigated the effects and the 
molecular mechanism of DHA on the proliferation, differentiation, and survival 
of osteoclast lineage cells using mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs). 
DHA suppressed the macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF)-induced 
proliferation of osteoclast precursors, BMMs, in a dose-dependent manner. The 
attenuated proliferation of DHA-treated BMMs was related to M-CSF inhibition 
that selectively decreased Akt activation and downregulated cyclin D1 and cyclin 
D2 expression. DHA also blocked receptor activator of NF-κB ligand 
(RANKL)-induced osteoclast differentiation from BMMs. At the molecular level, 
DHA inhibited JNK, ERK, and p38 MAPKs. In addition, it inhibited NF-κB signaling 
cascades, as demonstrated by the suppression of RANKL-mediated IκBα 
phosphorylation, NF-κB subunit p65 nuclear translocation, and NF-κB 
transcriptional activation. Accordingly, DHA attenuated the induction of c-Fos 
and nuclear factor of activated T cells c1 (NFATc1). Furthermore, DHA 
accelerated the apoptosis of mature osteoclasts by inducing Bim expression, a 
critical modulator of osteoclast apoptosis. Collectively, our data demonstrate 
that DHA exerts an anti-osteoclastogenic effect by suppressing the proliferation 
and differentiation of BMMs and enhancing the apoptosis of mature osteoclasts, 
thereby resulting in a diminished number of bone-resorptive cells.
