Reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a role in intracellular signaling during 
osteoclastogenesis. We previously reported that transcriptional factor nuclear 
factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) was exported from the nucleus to the cytoplasm 
by receptor activator of nuclear factor-ÎºB ligand (RANKL), and that Nrf2 
negatively regulated osteoclastogenesis via antioxidant enzyme up-regulation. 
Knockout mice of BTB and CNC homology 1 (Bach1)-the competitor for Nrf2 in 
transcriptional regulation-was known to attenuate RANKL-mediated 
osteoclastogenesis, although the mechanism remains unclear. Therefore, we 
hypothesized that RANKL could be involved in the nuclear translocation of Bach1, 
which would attenuate Nrf2-mediated antioxidant enzymes, thereby augmenting 
intracellular ROS signaling in osteoclasts. RANKL induced Bach1 nuclear import 
and Nrf2 nuclear export. Induction of Bach1 nuclear export increased Nrf2 
nuclear import, augmented antioxidant enzyme expression, and, thus, diminished 
RANKL-mediated osteoclastogenesis via attenuated intracellular ROS signaling. 
Finally, an in vivo mouse bone destruction model clearly demonstrated that 
induction of Bach1 nuclear export inhibited bone destruction. In this study, we 
report that RANKL favors osteoclastogenesis via attenuation of Nrf2-mediated 
antioxidant enzyme expression by competing with Bach1 nuclear accumulation. Of 
importance, induction of Bach1 nuclear export activates Nrf2-dependent 
antioxidant enzyme expression, thereby attenuating osteoclastogenesis. Bach1 
nuclear export might be a therapeutic target for such bone destructive diseases 
as rheumatoid arthritis, osteoporosis, and periodontitis.-Kanzaki, H., 
Shinohara, F., Itohiya, K., Yamaguchi, Y., Katsumata, Y., Matsuzawa, M., Fukaya, 
S., Miyamoto, Y., Wada, S., Nakamura, Y. RANKL induces Bach1 nuclear import and 
attenuates Nrf2-mediated antioxidant enzymes, thereby augmenting intracellular 
reactive oxygen species signaling and osteoclastogenesis in mice.
