BACKGROUND: Osteopontin (OPN) is an important proinflammatory cytokine in 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Levels of OPN have been shown to be significantly 
correlated with interleukin-17 (IL-17) production and expression of Th17 cells 
in the synovial fluid of RA patients. Here, we investigated the role of OPN in 
monocyte migration, IL-17 production and osteoblasts.
METHODS: OPN and IL-17 expression profiles in osteoarthritis (OA) and RA 
synovial fluid were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The 
expression of the microRNA, miR-129-3p, in osteoblasts was analyzed by real-time 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). Immunoreactive proteins were 
spotted by Western blotting. We used the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse 
model to investigate the role of OPN in monocyte migration during RA.
RESULTS: OPN and IL-17 expression were higher in RA synovial fluid as compared 
to OA samples. We also found that OPN promotes IL-17 expression in osteoblasts 
and thereby enhances monocyte migration via the Syk/PI3K/Akt signaling pathway. 
miR-129-3p expression was found to be negatively regulated by OPN via the 
Syk/PI3K/Akt signal cascade. In contrast, lentiviral vectors expressing short 
hairpin RNA inhibited OPN expression and ameliorated articular swelling, 
cartilage erosion and monocyte infiltration in the ankle joints of CIA mice.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, our study is the first to describe how OPN 
promotes monocyte migration by upregulating IL-17 expression in osteoblasts in 
RA disease.
SIGNIFICANCE: These findings indicate that OPN could serve as a potential 
therapeutic target for the treatment of RA.
