BACKGROUNDS: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have increased risk of 
sudden cardiac death (SCD), which is two-fold higher than general population. 
The driving cause of SCD was considered due to lift-threatening arrhythmia where 
systemic inflammation acts as the pathophysiological basis linking RA to 
autonomicdysfunction.
METHODS: To assess the sympathetic over-activity of "inflammatory reflex", we 
measured heart rate variability (HRV) in a rat collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
model, whose arthritis is induced in Lewis rats by intradermal injection of 
emulsion of type II collagen. Single-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was recorded 
for 30 min every two days. Time and frequency-domain parameters, detrended 
fluctuation analysis (DFA), deceleration (DC) and acceleration capacity (AC) 
were analyzed.
RESULTS: Compared with 9 control rats, many of HRV parameters of 9 CIA rats 
revealed significant different. At the beginning of arthritis, LF/HF was 
significant higher than controls (1st week: 2.41 ± 0.7 vs. 1.76 ± 0.6, p < 0.05; 
2nd week: 2.24 ± 0.5 vs. 1.58 ± 0.5, p < 0.05) indicating intensive inflammatory 
reflex at the initial phase of inflammation but no significant difference was 
observed in the following recover phase. The similar trend of DFA parameters was 
noted. However, the DC appeared progressive lower despite of no significant 
increase of the LF/HF compared with controls since 4th week.
CONCLUSIONS: We observed sympathetic over-activation of inflammatory reflex 
during early stage of arthritis in CIA rats. The ongoing decline of DC indicated 
advanced cardiac autonomic dysfunction regardless of remission of acute 
arthritis.
