Herba Ephedrae-Radix Aconiti Lateralis, composed of Ephedrae (Mahuang in 
Chinese) and Radix Aconiti Lateralis (Fuzi in Chinese), is a classical herbal 
combination proven to be effective in treating common cold, asthma, and 
rheumatoid arthritis. Alkaloids, bioactive components of the herbal extract, 
have been associated with many side effects. Nine alkaloids, including 
norephedrine, norpseudoephedrine, ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, methylephedrine, 
hypaconitine, benzoylaconine, benzoylmesaconine and benzoylhypaconine, were 
simultaneously quantified within 14.5min, by a validated ultra-performance 
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry method in various rat tissues, 
urine, and feces after oral administration of Mahuang-Fuzi and single-herb 
extracts. The results indicated that the alkaloids were widely distributed in 
the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and brain. Lower bioavailability and 
higher clearance of some alkaloids were observed for the herbal combination, but 
hypaconitine showed a longer residence time and lower clearance. Elimination 
kinetics demonstrated that ephedra and aconitum alkaloids were mainly excreted 
in urine and feces, respectively. The tissue distribution and excretion of 
ephedra and aconitum alkaloids are comprehensively reported for the first time 
for the Mahuang-Fuzi combination. Compared with single-herb extracts, lower 
extraction efficiencies of alkaloids in vitro were observed which may result in 
their lower intake. However, the combination showed a prolonged residence time 
and delayed elimination of aconitum alkaloids, which increases the risk of drug 
accumulation. The study demonstrated potential risks of intoxication with 
aconitum alkaloids, associated with the use of Fuzi in combination with Mahuang. 
Mahuang-Fuzi is a classical combination used in clinics, further investigation 
is needed.
