The ideal therapeutic drug for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) should not only inhibit 
inflammation, but also prevent articular joint damage and particularly inhibit 
osteoclastogenesis. Betulinic acid (BA) is a natural pentacyclic triterpene that 
has displayed moderate anti-inflammatory and anti-osteoclastogenesis activities 
in various experimental systems, suggesting that BA or its derivatives could 
have an inhibitory effect on RA. In this study, we screened BA derivatives and 
found a heterocyclic ring-fused BA derivative, SH479, which had greater 
inhibitory effect than BA on Th17 differentiation. Moreover, we investigated the 
immune regulatory activity and potential therapeutic effects of SH479 in an 
experimental model of rheumatoid arthritis, the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) 
mouse model. SH479 significantly inhibited Th1 and Th17 polarization, 
antigen-specific T cell proliferation and splenic lymphocyte-induced 
osteoclastogenesis. Furthermore, it diminished arthritis scores as well as bone 
destruction and cartilage depletion in the CIA mouse model. The protective 
effect of SH479 was accompanied by decreased levels of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines IL-17 and IFN-Î³, together with enhanced anti-inflammatory cytokine 
expression including IL-10 and IL-4, as well as elevated CD4+ Foxp3+ cell 
number. At the molecular level, our results indicated that SH479 alleviated CIA 
through regulation of CD4+ T cell subtypes by JAK-STAT pathways. In conclusion, 
this study demonstrates that SH479 has therapeutic potential for rheumatoid 
arthritis through an anti-inflammatory effect by shifting a pathogenic Th17/Th1 
response to a Th2/Treg phenotype, and also through an additional articular bone 
protection effect.
