OBJECTIVE: Bruton's tyrosine kinase (BTK) transmits crucial survival signals 
from the B cell receptor (BCR) in B cells. Pharmacologic BTK inhibition 
effectively diminishes disease symptoms in mouse models of autoimmunity; 
conversely, transgenic BTK overexpression induces systemic autoimmunity in mice. 
We undertook this study to investigate BTK expression and activity in human B 
cells in the context of autoimmune disease.
METHODS: Using intracellular flow cytometry, we quantified BTK expression and 
phosphorylation in subsets of peripheral blood B cells from 30 patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 26 patients with primary Sj√∂gren's syndrome (SS), and 
matched healthy controls.
RESULTS: In circulating B cells, BTK protein expression levels correlated with 
BTK phosphorylation. BTK expression was up-regulated upon BCR stimulation in 
vitro and was significantly higher in CD27+ memory B cells than in CD27-IgD+ 
naive B cells. Importantly, BTK protein and phospho-BTK were significantly 
increased in B cells from anti-citrullinated protein antibody (ACPA)-positive RA 
patients but not in B cells from ACPA-negative RA patients. BTK was increased 
both in naive B cells and in memory B cells and correlated with frequencies of 
circulating CCR6+ Th17 cells. Likewise, BTK protein was increased in B cells 
from a major fraction of patients with primary SS and correlated with serum 
rheumatoid factor levels and parotid gland T cell infiltration. Interestingly, 
targeting T cell activation in patients with primary SS using the CTLA-4Ig 
fusion protein abatacept restored BTK protein expression in B cells to normal 
levels.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that autoimmune disease in humans is 
characterized by enhanced BTK activity, which is linked not only to autoantibody 
formation but also to T cell activity.
