Reversible janus associated kinase (JAK) inhibitors such as tofacitinib and 
decernotinib block cytokine signaling and are efficacious in treating autoimmune 
diseases. However, therapeutic doses are limited due to inhibition of other 
JAK/signal transducer and activator of transcription pathways associated with 
hematopoiesis, lipid biogenesis, infection, and immune responses. A selective 
JAK3 inhibitor may have a better therapeutic index; however, until recently, no 
compounds have been described that maintain JAK3 selectivity in cells, as well 
as against the kinome, with good physicochemical properties to test the JAK3 
hypothesis in vivo. To quantify the biochemical basis for JAK isozyme 
selectivity, we determined that the apparent Km value for each JAK isozyme 
ranged from 31.8 to 2.9 μM for JAK1 and JAK3, respectively. To confirm compound 
activity in cells, we developed a novel enzyme complementation assay that read 
activity of single JAK isozymes in a cellular context. Reversible JAK3 
inhibitors cannot achieve sufficient selectivity against other isozymes in the 
cellular context due to inherent differences in enzyme ATP Km values. Therefore, 
we developed irreversible JAK3 compounds that are potent and highly selective in 
vitro in cells and against the kinome. Compound 2, a potent inhibitor of JAK3 
(0.15 nM) was 4300-fold selective for JAK3 over JAK1 in enzyme assays, 67-fold 
[interleukin (IL)-2 versus IL-6] or 140-fold [IL-2 versus erythropoietin or 
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GMCSF)] selective in cellular 
reporter assays and >35-fold selective in human peripheral blood mononuclear 
cell assays (IL-7 versus IL-6 or GMCSF). In vivo, selective JAK3 inhibition was 
sufficient to block the development of inflammation in a rat model of rheumatoid 
arthritis, while sparing hematopoiesis.

Copyright © 2017 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.
