Recently, health awareness in Japan has been increasing and active exercise is 
now recommended to prevent lifestyle-related diseases. Cytokine activities have 
many positive effects in maintaining the health of a number of organs in the 
body. Myokines are cytokines secreted by skeletal muscles in response to 
exercise stimulation, and have recently generated much attention. Around 700,000 
patients in Japan suffer from rheumatoid arthritis, making it the most prevalent 
autoimmune disease that requires active prevention and treatment. In the present 
study, a mouse model of spontaneous arthritis (SKG/Jcl) was subjected to 
continuous exercise stimulation, starting before the disease onset, to examine 
the effects of anti-inflammatory and inflammatory cytokine secretion on 
arthritis. For this stimulation, we developed a device that combines shaking and 
vibration. The results revealed that exercise stimulation delayed the onset of 
arthritis and slowed its progression. Thickened articular cartilage and multiple 
aggregates of chondrocytes were also observed. Further, exercise stimulation 
increased the expression of IL-6, IL-10, and IL-15, and inhibited TNF-α 
expression. From these results, we infer that the anti-inflammatory effects of 
IL-6 and IL-10, which showed increased expression upon exercise stimulation, 
inhibited the inflammatory activity of TNF-α and possibly delayed the onset of 
arthritis and slowed its progression. Novel methods for preventing and treating 
arthritis under clinical settings can be developed on the basis of these 
findings.
