Inflammatory bone resorption mediated by osteoclasts is a major cause of 
morbidity and disability in many inflammatory disorders, including rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). The mechanisms that regulate osteoclastogenesis and bone 
resorption in inflammatory settings are complex and have not been well 
elucidated. In this study, we identify the immunoregulator differentially 
expressed in FDCP 6 homolog (Def6) as a novel inhibitor of osteoclastogenesis in 
physiological and inflammatory conditions. Def6 deficiency in Def6-/- mice 
enhanced the sensitivity of osteoclast precursors to the physiological 
osteoclastogenic inducer receptor activator for NF-κB ligand, and Def6-/- 
osteoclasts formed actin rings. Furthermore, Def6 deficiency markedly increased 
TNF-α-induced osteoclastogenesis in vitro and in vivo and enhanced bone 
resorption in an inflammatory osteolysis mouse model. TNF-α serum levels 
correlated negatively with Def6 expression levels in osteoclast precursors 
obtained from RA patients, and the osteoclastogenic capacity of the osteoclast 
precursors was significantly inversely correlated with their Def6 expression 
levels, indicating that Def6 functions as an inhibitor of excessive osteoclast 
formation and bone destruction in RA. Mechanistically, Def6 suppressed 
osteoclastogenesis and the expression of key osteoclastogenic factors NFATc1, B 
lymphocyte-induced maturation protein-1, and c-Fos by regulating an endogenous 
IFN-β-mediated autocrine feedback loop. The Def6-dependent pathway may represent 
a novel therapeutic target to prevent pathological bone destruction.
