Synthetic glucocorticoids (GCs), including dexamethasone (DEX), are powerful 
anti-inflammatory drugs. Long-term use of GCs, however, can result in metabolic 
side effects such as hyperglycemia, hepatosteatosis, and insulin resistance. The 
GC receptor (GR) and liver X receptors (LXRα and LXRβ) regulate overlapping 
genes involved in gluconeogenesis and inflammation. We have previously shown 
that Lxrβ-/- mice are resistant to the diabetogenic effects of DEX but still 
sensitive to its immunosuppressive actions. To determine whether this finding 
could be exploited for therapeutic intervention, we treated mice with GSK2033, a 
pan-LXR antagonist, alone or combined with DEX. GSK2033 suppressed GC-induced 
gluconeogenic gene expression without affecting immune-responsive GR target 
genes. The suppressive effect of GSK2033 on DEX-induced gluconeogenic genes was 
specific to LXRβ, was liver cell autonomous, and occurred in a target 
gene-specific manner. Compared with DEX treatment alone, the coadministration of 
GSK2033 with DEX decreased the recruitment of GR and its accessory factors MED1 
and C/EBPβ to the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase promoter. However, GSK2033 
had no effect on DEX-mediated suppression of inflammatory genes expressed in the 
liver or in mouse primary macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharides. In 
conclusion, our study provides evidence that the gluconeogenic and 
immunosuppressive actions of GR activation can be mechanistically dissociated by 
pharmacological antagonism of LXRβ. Treatment with an LXRβ antagonist could 
allow the safer use of existing GC drugs in patients requiring chronic dosing of 
anti-inflammatory agents for the treatment of diseases such as rheumatoid 
arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease.
