OBJECTIVE: Antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCP) in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) can express the inherently autoreactive gene VH 4-34, detected 
using the rat monoclonal antibody 9G4. Patients with the polyarticular subtype 
of juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) share some but not all of the features of 
adult patients with RA. This study was undertaken to compare serologic findings 
for rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-CCP, and 9G4-expressing anti-CCP in a large JIA 
cohort with a cohort of adult RA patients.
METHODS: Serum from 88 patients with polyarticular JIA, 29 patients with 
enthesitis-related arthritis, 38 patients with extended oligoarthritis, 31 
adolescent controls, 35 patients with RA, and 30 adult controls were tested for 
RF, for IgG, IgA, and IgM anti-CCP, and for 9G4-expressing anti-CCP by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Total serum 9G4-positive IgM was also 
measured.
RESULTS: Of 65 patients with RF-negative polyarticular JIA, 4 (6.2%) were IgG 
anti-CCP positive. Sera from 20 of 23 patients with RF-positive polyarticular 
JIA (87.0%), 24 of 35 patients with RA (68.6%), and 1 patient with extended 
oligoarthritis contained IgG anti-CCP. IgA and IgM anti-CCP levels were lower in 
the adolescent group (P < 0.01). Levels of 9G4-expressing anti-CCP were higher 
in patients with RF-positive polyarticular JIA than in those with RF-negative 
polyarticular JIA (P < 0.0001). Median levels of 9G4-expressing anti-CCP in 
patients with RF-positive polyarticular JIA and those with RA did not differ. 
Expression of 9G4 on serum total IgM was greater in patients with RF-positive 
polyarticular JIA than other adolescent groups (P < 0.01), but similar to adult 
RF-positive RA.
CONCLUSION: In healthy individuals, 9G4-positive B cells comprise 5-10% of the 
peripheral blood pool but serum immunoglobulins utilizing VH 4-34 are 
disproportionately low. The idiotope recognized by 9G4 was detected on anti-CCP 
antibodies in >80% of patients with RF-positive polyarticular JIA. VH 4-34 usage 
by anti-CCP in both JIA and RA patients suggest elicitation of these 
autoantibodies through shared pathogenic B cell selection processes.
