OBJECTIVE: Aberrant activation of synovial fibroblasts is a key determinant in 
the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aims of this study were to 
produce a map of gene expression and epigenetic changes occurring in this cell 
type during disease progression in the human tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-transgenic model of arthritis and to identify commonalities with human 
synovial fibroblasts.
METHODS: We used deep sequencing to probe the transcriptome, the methylome, and 
the chromatin landscape of cultured mouse arthritogenic synovial fibroblasts at 
3 stages of disease, as well as synovial fibroblasts stimulated with human TNF. 
We performed bioinformatics analyses at the gene, pathway, and network levels, 
compared mouse and human data, and validated selected genes in both species.
RESULTS: We found that synovial fibroblast arthritogenicity was reflected in 
distinct dynamic patterns of transcriptional dysregulation, which was especially 
enriched in pathways of the innate immune response and mesenchymal 
differentiation. A functionally representative subset of these changes was 
associated with methylation, mostly in gene bodies. The arthritogenic state 
involved highly active promoters, which were marked by histone H3K4 
trimethylation. There was significant overlap between the mouse and human data 
at the level of dysregulated genes and to an even greater extent at the level of 
pathways.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first systematic examination of the pathogenic 
changes that occur in mouse synovial fibroblasts during progressive TNF-driven 
arthritogenesis. Significant correlations with the respective human RA synovial 
fibroblast data further validate the human TNF-transgenic mouse as a reliable 
model of the human disease. The resource of data generated in this work may 
serve as a framework for the discovery of novel pathogenic mechanisms and 
disease biomarkers.
