Periarticular bone loss is a long known but yet insufficiently understood 
phenomenon in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. This study investigated 
whether autoimmunity against citrullinated proteins is causally involved in 
triggering periarticular bone loss. Periarticular bone loss was studied in the 
standard antigen-induced arthritis (AIA) mouse model with methylated bovine 
serum albumin (mBSA) as well as a modified model with mutated citrullinated 
vimentin (MCV) alone or in combination with mBSA. Periarticular bone loss, 
subchondral osteoclastogenesis, as well as local expression of cytokines, 
osteoclast genes, and peptidyl-arginine deiminase (PAD) enzymes were assessed 
after arthritis induction. Immune cell and osteoclast precursor infiltration 
were detected in the periarticular bone marrow and local lymph nodes. In 
addition, periarticular bone loss was assessed upon challenge of mice with 
purified anti-MCV antibody. Despite inducing a milder form of arthritis than 
mBSA, MCV triggered significant periarticular bone loss associated with an 
increased infiltration of osteoclast precursors and mature osteoclasts in the 
periarticular bone marrow. MCV enhanced the expression of the osteoclast 
inducers RANKL and M-CSF, the cytokines IL-8, IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-α, as well as 
PAD2 and PAD4 enzymes in the periarticular bone marrow. Furthermore, also 
anti-MCV antibody challenge induced significant periarticular bone loss and 
local osteoclastogenesis in the mice. Autoimmunity against citrullinated 
vimentin triggers periarticular bone loss by osteoclast activation in the bone 
marrow. These findings may explain why periarticular bone loss is already found 
very early in the disease course of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. © 2017 
American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
