Osteoclasts play key roles in bone remodeling and pathologic osteolytic 
disorders such as inflammation, infection, bone implant loosening, rheumatoid 
arthritis, metastatic bone cancers, and pathological fractures. Osteoclasts are 
formed by the fusion of monocytes in response to receptor activators of 
NF-κB-ligand (RANKL) and macrophage colony stimulating factor 1 (M-CSF). 
Calreticulin (CRT), a commonly known intracellular protein as a calcium-binding 
chaperone, has an unexpectedly robust anti-osteoclastogenic effect when its 
recombinant form is applied to osteoclast precursors in vitro or at the site of 
bone inflammation externally in vivo. Externally applied Calreticulin was 
internalized inside the cells. It inhibited key pro-osteoclastogenic 
transcription factors such as c-Fos and nuclear factor of activated T cells, 
cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1)-in osteoclast precursor cells that were treated with 
RANKL in vitro. Recombinant human Calreticulin (rhCRT) inhibited 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammatory osteoclastogenesis in the mouse 
calvarial bone in vivo. Cathepsin K molecular imaging verified decreased 
Cathepsin K activity when rhCalreticulin was applied at the site of LPS 
application in vivo. Recombinant forms of intracellular proteins or their 
derivatives may act as novel extracellular therapeutic agents. We anticipate our 
findings to be a starting point in unraveling hidden extracellular functions of 
other intracellular proteins in different cell types of many organs for new 
therapeutic opportunities. © 2017 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 35:2658-2666, 2017.
