Background: The proliferation of publicly accessible large-scale biological data 
together with increasing availability of bioinformatics tools have the potential 
to transform biomedical research. Here we report a crowdsourcing Jamboree that 
explored whether a team of volunteer biologists without formal bioinformatics 
training could use OMiCC, a crowdsourcing web platform that facilitates the 
reuse and (meta-) analysis of public gene expression data, to compile and 
annotate gene expression data, and design comparisons between disease and 
control sample groups. Methods: The Jamboree focused on several common human 
autoimmune diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), multiple 
sclerosis (MS), type I diabetes (DM1), and rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and the 
corresponding mouse models. Meta-analyses were performed in OMiCC using 
comparisons constructed by the participants to identify 1) gene expression 
signatures for each disease (disease versus healthy controls at the gene 
expression and biological pathway levels), 2) conserved signatures across all 
diseases within each species (pan-disease signatures), and 3) conserved 
signatures between species for each disease and across all diseases 
(cross-species signatures). Results: A large number of differentially expressed 
genes were identified for each disease based on meta-analysis, with observed 
overlap among diseases both within and across species. Gene set/pathway 
enrichment of upregulated genes suggested conserved signatures (e.g., 
interferon) across all human and mouse conditions. Conclusions: Our Jamboree 
exercise provides evidence that when enabled by appropriate tools, a "crowd" of 
biologists can work together to accelerate the pace by which the increasingly 
large amounts of public data can be reused and meta-analyzed for generating and 
testing hypotheses. Our encouraging experience suggests that a similar 
crowdsourcing approach can be used to explore other biological questions.
