In rheumatoid arthritis (RA), cartilage and bone matrix are degraded, and 
extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, acting as cellular activators, are 
liberated. Similar to ECM proteins, matrix-bound chemokines, cytokines, and 
growth factors (GFs) influence functional properties of key cells in RA, 
especially synovial fibroblasts. The role of these molecules on attachment, 
migration, and proinflammatory and prodestructive activation of RASFs was 
analyzed. Adhesion/migration of RASFs were examined under GF-enriched (GF+) or 
-reduced (GF-) conditions with or without addition of matrix-associated GFs, 
TGF-β, and platelet-derived GF to GF- or culture supernatants. Fibroblast 
adhesion and alterations in proinflammatory/prodestructive properties (e.g., 
IL-6/matrix metalloproteinase 3-release) in response to matrix-associated 
molecules were compared. Effects of GF+, GF-, and other ECM components on human 
RASF-mediated cartilage invasion were examined in the SCID mouse model. RASF 
adhesion under GF- conditions was significantly lower compared with GF+ 
conditions (6.8- versus 8.3-fold). This effect was specific for RA because 
control cells showed opposite effects (e.g., osteoarthritis synovial fibroblasts 
[SF]; GF- versus GF+: 10.7- versus 8-fold). Addition of TGF-β to GF- increased 
RASF attachment (12.7-fold) compared with other matrices and components. RASF 
adhesion to GF+ matrix resulted in the strongest IL-6 and matrix 
metalloproteinase-3 release, and was even more pronounced compared with 
supplementation of single GFs. In vivo, GF- matrix decreased RASF-mediated 
cartilage invasion compared with GF+ matrix. ECM components and especially GFs 
when bound within ECM actively enhance RASF attraction and cartilage adhesion. 
This observation was specific for RASFs as a reverse behavior was observed for 
controls.
