Purpose: This study aimed to explore underlying action mechanism of Wu-Tou 
decoction (WTD) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) through network pharmacology 
prediction and experimental verification. Methods: Chemical compounds and human 
target proteins of WTD as well as RA-related human genes were obtained from TCM 
Database @ Taiwan, PubChem and GenBank, respectively. Subsequently, molecular 
networks and canonical pathways presumably involved in the treatment of WTD on 
RA were generated by ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) software. Furthermore, 
experimental validation was carried out with MIP-1β-induced U937 cell model and 
collagen induced arthritis (CIA) rat model. Results: CCR5 signaling pathway in 
macrophages was shown to be the top one shared signaling pathway associated with 
both cell immune response and cytokine signaling. In addition, protein kinase C 
(PKC) δ and p38 in this pathway were treated as target proteins of WTD in RA. In 
vitro experiments indicated that WTD inhibited MIP-1β-induced production of 
TNF-α, MIP-1α, and RANTES as well as phosphorylation of CCR5, PKC δ, and p38 in 
U937 cells. WTD treatment maintained the inhibitory effects on production of 
TNF-α and RANTES in MIP-1β-induced U937 cells after CCR5 knockdown. In vivo 
experiments demonstrated that WTD ameliorated symptoms in CIA rats, decreased 
the levels of IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, TNF-α, MIP-1α, MIP-2, RANTES, and IP-10 in 
serum of CIA rats, as well as mRNA levels of MIP-1α, MIP-2, RANTES, and IP-10 in 
ankle joints of CIA rats. Furthermore, WTD also lowered the phosphorylation 
levels of CCR5, PKC δ and p38 in both ankle joints and macrophages in ankle 
joints from CIA rats. Conclusion: It was demonstrated in this research that WTD 
played a role in inhibiting inflammatory response in RA which was closely 
connected with the modulation effect of WTD on CCR5 signaling pathway in 
macrophages.
