OBJECTIVE: This study aims to investigate the regulatory mechanism of 
1,25-(OH)2D3 on the proliferation of fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) and 
expressions of pro-inflammatory cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) rats via 
microRNA-22 (miR-22).
METHODS: A rat model of RA was established with a subcutaneous injection of type 
II collagen. After treated with different concentrations of 1,25-(OH)2D3 the 
proliferation of FLS was estimated by the MTT method, and the optimal 
concentration of 1,25-(OH)2D3 was selected for further experiments. Cell 
proliferation was detected by MTT. Cell cycle and apoptosis were analyzed by 
FCM. The IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and PGE2 protein expressions were determined by 
ELISA, and MMP-3, INOS, and Cox-2 mRNA expressions were measured by qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: The rat model of RA was successfully established. Compared with the 
blank group, the 1,25-(OH)2D3 and miR-22 inhibitors groups exhibited higher 
proliferation inhibition and apoptosis rates, lower levels of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and PGE2), and decreased mRNA expressions of 
MMP-3, INOS, and Cox-2. The miR-22 mimics group had lower proliferation 
inhibition and apoptosis rates, elevated expressions of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines and MMP-3, INOS, and Cox-2 than the blank group. In contrast to the 
1,25-(OH)2D3 group, the proliferation inhibition and apoptosis rates were 
down-regulated, and the expressions of pro-inflammatory cytokines and MMP-3, 
INOS, and Cox-2 were up-regulated in the 1,25-(OH)2D3 + miR-22 mimics group.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated that 1,25-(OH)2D3 inhibits the proliferation 
of FLS and alleviates inflammatory response in RA rats by down-regulating 
miR-22.
