Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease in which chronic inflammation 
of the synovial joints can lead to destruction of cartilage and bone. 
Pre-clinical studies attempt to uncover the underlying causes by emulating the 
disease in genetically different mouse strains and characterising the nature and 
severity of bone shape changes as indicators of pathology. This paper presents a 
fully automated method for obtaining quantitative measurements of bone 
destruction from volumetric micro-CT images of a mouse hind paw. A statistical 
model of normal bone morphology derived from a training set of healthy examples 
serves as a template against which a given pathological sample is compared. 
Abnormalities in bone shapes are identified as deviations from the model 
statistics, characterised in terms of type (erosion / formation) and quantified 
in terms of severity (percentage affected bone area). The colour-coded 
magnitudes of the deviations superimposed on a three-dimensional rendering of 
the paw show at a glance the severity of malformations for the individual bones 
and joints. With quantitative data it is possible to derive population 
statistics characterising differences in bone malformations for different mouse 
strains and in different anatomical regions. The method was applied to data 
acquired from three different mouse strains. The derived quantitative indicators 
of bone destruction have shown agreement both with the subjective visual scores 
and with the previous biological findings. This suggests that pathological bone 
shape changes can be usefully and objectively identified as deviations from the 
model statistics.
