Skeletal muscle weakness is a prominent feature in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). In this study, we investigated whether neuromuscular electrical 
stimulation (NMES) training protects against skeletal muscle dysfunction in rats 
with adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA). AIA was produced by intraarticular 
injection of complete Freund's adjuvant into the knees of Wistar rats. For NMES 
training, dorsiflexor muscles were stimulated via a surface electrode (0.5 ms 
pulse, 50 Hz, 2 s on/4 s off). NMES training was performed every other day for 
three weeks and consisted of three sets produced at three min intervals. In each 
set, the electrical current was set to achieve 60% of the initial maximum 
isometric torque and the current was progressively increased to maintain this 
torque; stimulation was stopped when the 60% torque could no longer be 
maintained. After the intervention period, extensor digitorum longus (EDL) 
muscles were excised and used for physiological and biochemical analyses. There 
was a reduction in specific force production (i.e. force per cross-sectional 
area) in AIA EDL muscles, which was accompanied by aggregation of the 
myofibrillar proteins actin and desmin. Moreover, the protein expressions of the 
pro-oxidative enzymes NADPH oxidase, neuronal nitric oxide synthase, p62, and 
the ratio of the autophagosome marker LC3bII/LC3bI were increased in AIA EDL 
muscles. NMES training prevented all these AIA-induced alterations. The present 
data suggest that NMES training prevents AIA-induced skeletal muscle weakness 
presumably by counteracting the formation of actin and desmin aggregates. Thus, 
NMES training can be an effective treatment for muscle dysfunction in patients 
with RA.
