Aconiti kusnezoffii radix (AKR), the root of Aconitum kusnezoffii Reichb., is 
commonly used in the treatment of the rheumatoid arthritis. However, the 
clinical application is limited due to its potential toxicity. Therefore, to 
investigate the mechanism of its potential neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity, a 
comprehensive metabolomics study combined with serum biochemistry and 
histopathology measurements was carried out. A UHPLC-Q-TOF mass spectrometry 
based metabolomics approach was applied to characterize the AKR toxicity, while 
the toxicity attenuation effects of Aconiti kusnezoffii radix cocta (AKRC) on 
Wistar rats were also investigated. Two chromatographic techniques involving 
reversed-phase chromatography and hydrophilic interaction chromatography were 
combined for the serum and urine detection, which balanced the integrity and 
selectivity of the two matrices. Principal component analysis was used to 
determine the groups, and principal component analysis discriminant analysis was 
carried out to confirm the important variables. Then, the developed integrative 
toxicity evaluation method was applied to assess the toxicity of AKR and the 
attenuation effect of AKRC. The highly sensitive and specific toxic biomarkers, 
which can provide practical bases were identified for the diagnosis of the 
neurotoxicity and nephrotoxicity induced by AKR. In all, a total of 19 putative 
biomarkers were characterized, and related metabolic pathways were identified. 
The study demonstrated that the established metabolomics strategy is a powerful 
approach for investigating the mechanisms of herbal toxicity and the attenuation 
effect of a processing method and would provide medical solutions for other 
toxic herbal medications and further clinical evidence on how AKR improves 
symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis patients.
