Sinomenine hydrochloride (SH) is an ideal drug for the treatment of rheumatoid 
arthritis and osteoarthritis. However, high plasma concentration of systemically 
administered SH can release histamine, which can cause rash and gastrointestinal 
side effects. Topical delivery can increase SH concentration in the synovial 
fluid without high plasma level, thus minimizing systemic side effects. However, 
passive diffusion of SH was found to be inefficient because of the presence of 
the stratum corneum layer. Therefore, an effective method is required to 
compensate for the low efficiency of SH passive diffusion. In this study, 
transdermal experiments in vitro and clinical tests were utilized to explore the 
optimized parameters for electroporation of topical delivery for SH. 
Fluorescence experiment and hematoxylin and eosin staining analysis were 
performed to reveal the mechanism by which electroporation promoted permeation. 
In vitro, optimized electroporation parameters were 3 KHz, exponential waveform, 
and intensity 10. Using these parameters, transdermal permeation of SH was 
increased by 1.9-10.1 fold in mice skin and by 1.6-47.1 fold in miniature pig 
skin compared with passive diffusion. After the electroporation stimulation, the 
intercellular intervals and epidermal cracks in the skin increased. In clinical 
tests, SH concentration in synovial fluid was 20.84 ng/mL after treatment with 
electroporation. Therefore, electroporation with optimized parameters could 
significantly enhance transdermal permeation of SH. The mechanism by which 
electroporation promoted permeation was that the electronic pulses made the skin 
structure looser. To summarize, electroporation may be an effective 
complementary method for transdermal permeation of SH. The controlled release of 
electroporation may be a promising clinical method for transdermal drug 
administration.
