Andrographolide, a diterpenoid lactone obtained from plant Andrographis 
paniculata, is used in South Asian countries to relieve various inflammatory 
symptoms. To study the effects of this agent, the impact of andrographolide on 
production of inflammatory mediators were delineated in mouse peritoneal 
macrophages (PMϕ). Inflammatory mediators like nitric oxide (NO), tumor necrosis 
factor (TNF)-α, interleukin-6 and related molecular mechanisms of 
andrographolide-mediated inhibition of enzymes/transcription factors were 
studied. In addition, the in vivo anti-inflammatory activity of andrographolide 
was evaluated in an adjuvant-induced arthritis rat model. The results indicated 
that andrographolide clearly inhibited the production of NO and TNF-α in 
lipopolysaccharide-activated PMϕ in a dose-related manner. Immunoblot analyses 
revealed that andrographolide suppressed activation of both inducible NO 
synthase and cyclo-oxygenase-2 by directly targeting nuclear transcription 
factor (NF)-κB. Complete Freund's Adjuvant-induced paw edema in rats was also 
significantly inhibited by andrographolide treatment. From the data, we 
concluded that andrographolide imparted anti-inflammatory effects by suppressing 
two key inflammatory enzymes and a signaling pathway that mediates expression of 
variety of inflammatory cytokines/agents in situ. It is plausible that 
eventually, after further toxicologic characterization, andrographolide might be 
useful as a drug for the clinical treatment of various inflammatory diseases 
like rheumatoid arthritis or diseases associated with joint pain.
