Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic and autoimmune-mediated inflammatory 
disease. We aimed to investigate the regulation of lncRNA HOTAIR in LPS-treated 
chondrocytes and RA mouse. Our results showed that HOTAIR expression was 
significantly reduced in LPS-treated chondrocytes. The HOTAIR was then 
over-expressed in chondrocytes by transfecting recombinant lentivirus carrying 
sequences encoding HOTAIR. The LPS-induced reduction of cell proliferation rate 
and production of two inflammatory factors interleukin (IL)-17, IL-23 were 
markedly inhibited. Enforced expression of HOTAIR also led to the upregulation 
of proliferation-related protein Ki67 and proliferating cell nuclear antigen 
(PCNA). Moreover, a negative correlation was detected between the expression of 
HOTAIR and microRNA (miR)-138, and the expression of miR-138 was significantly 
increased in LPS-induced chondrocytes. The effects of HOTAIR over-expression on 
the proliferation and inflammation were partly reversed by miR-138 
overexpression. Furthermore, the overexpression of HOTAIR significantly 
inhibited the activation of nuclear transcription factor-κB (NF-κB) in 
LPS-treated chondrocytes by suppressing p65 to cell nucleus, resulting in the 
down-regulation of IL-1β and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. In addition, the in 
vivo experiments exhibited that overexpression of HOTAIR increased cell 
proliferation and inhibited inflammation in RA rats, which were demonstrated by 
upregulation of Ki67 and PCNA, reduced CD4+IL-17+,CD4+IL-23+ cells, and 
down-regulation of p-p65, IL-1β and TNF-α. In summary, our study suggests HOTAIR 
plays a protective role in RA by increasing proliferation rate and inhibiting 
inflammation, which may be related with the regulation of miR-138 expression and 
NF-κB signaling pathway. These results suggest that the regulation of HOTAIR may 
be a promising therapeutic strategy for RA.
