Over the past three decades, physicians have used laser sources for the 
management of different pain conditions obtaining controversial results that 
call for further investigations. In order to evaluate the pain relieving 
possibilities of photobiomodulation therapy (PBMT), we tested two near infrared 
(NIR) laser systems, with different power, against various kinds of persistent 
hyperalgesia animal models. In rats, articular pain was reproduced by the 
intra-articular injection of sodium monoiodoacetate (MIA) and complete Freund's 
adjuvant (CFA), while compressive neuropathy was modelled by the chronic 
constriction injury of the sciatic nerve (CCI). In MIA and CFA models, (NIR) 
laser (MLS-Mphi, ASA S.r.l., Vicenza, Italy) application was started 14 days 
after injury and was performed once a day for a total of 13 applications. In 
MIA-treated animals, the anti-hyperalgesic effect of laser began 5 min after 
treatment and vanished after 60 min. The subsequent applications evoked similar 
effects. In CFA-treated rats, laser efficacy started 5 min after treatment and 
disappeared after 180 min. In rats that underwent CCI, two treatment protocols 
with similar fluence but different power output were tested using a new 
experimental device called Multiwave Locked System laser (MLS-HPP). Treatments 
began 7 days after injury and were performed during 3 weeks for a total of 10 
applications. Both protocols reduced mechanical hyperalgesia and hindlimb weight 
bearing alterations until 60 min after treatment with a higher efficacy recorded 
for the animals treated using the higher power output. In conclusion, this study 
supports laser therapy as a potential treatment for immediate relief of chronic 
articular or neuropathic pain.
