At present, the early phenomenon of inflammatory angiogenesis is rarely studied 
in Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Previous research found that PEG-HM-3, an integrin 
inhibitor, possessed anti-angiogenesis and anti-rheumatic activity. In this 
study, the advantages of inhibiting angiogenesis and immune cell adhesion and 
migration, as well as the benefits of anti-arthritis effects, were evaluated 
using a combination of PEG-HM-3 and methotrexate (MTX). In vitro, spleen cell 
proliferation and the levels of tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) in macrophage 
supernatant were assessed. Hind paw edema, arthritis index, clinical score, body 
weight and immunohistochemistry (IHC) of the spleen, thymus, and joint cavity 
were evaluated in vivo in adjuvant-induced arthritis rats. Joints of the left 
hind paws were imaged by X-ray. The expression of the toll-like receptor 4 
(TLR-4) protein was assessed in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced synoviocytes. 
PEG-HM-3 combined with MTX significantly reduced primary and secondary swelling 
of the hind paws, the arthritis index, the clinical score and bone erosion. The 
results of IHC showed that the levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in spleens and the 
levels of TNF-α, CD31 (cluster of differentiation 31), and CD105 in the joint 
cavity were decreased. The body weight of rats was maintained during combination 
therapy. Ankle cavity integrity, and bone erosion and deformity were improved in 
combination treatment. The expression of TLR-4 was significantly reduced with 
combination treatment in rat synoviocytes. Co-suppression of both inflammation 
and angiogenesis in arthritis was achieved in this design with combination 
therapy. The activity of nuclear transcription factor (NF-κB) and the expression 
of inflammatory factors were down regulated via integrin αvβ₃ and TLR-4 
signaling pathways. In the future, the application of this combination can be a 
candidate in early and mid-term RA therapy.
