The aim of the current study was to investigate the role and mechanism of 
sirtuin 1 (Sirt1) in the regulation of synovial cell invasion and joint 
destruction in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The Sirt1 protein and mRNA levels in 
fibroblast‑like synoviocytes (FLS) isolated from RA synovial tissues were 
compared with normal tissues by western blot and reverse 
transcription‑polymerase chain reaction. RA FLS were then treated with the Sirt1 
agonist resveratrol (1, 3 and 10 µg/ml) for 48 h, and their invasiveness and 
expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) 1 and MMP13 protein and mRNA were 
measured. Furthermore, a collagen‑induced arthritis (CIA) rat model was 
established and the rats were divided into a model group, and low‑ and high‑dose 
resveratrol (2.5 and 10 mg/kg/day) groups to receive an intraperitoneal 
injection of resveratrol for 42 consecutive days. The joint morphology, 
arthritis index (AI), and MMP1 and MMP13 expression in synovial tissues was 
monitored. The Sirt1 protein and mRNA levels in RA FLS were significantly lower 
compared with normal FLS (P<0.01). The resveratrol treatment significantly 
inhibited the invasive ability of RA FLS (P<0.01) and reduced MMP1 and MMP13 
expression (P<0.01). The AI in low‑ and high‑dose groups was significantly lower 
compared with the model group from day 28 (P<0.01). Resveratrol also reduced the 
swelling and damage and decreased MMP1 and MMP13 expression levels in CIA rats 
(P<0.01). The resveratrol‑induced upregulation of Sirt1 in RA FLS may 
significantly inhibit the invasion of these cells and reduce the degree of joint 
damage, which may be mediated through the inhibition of MMP1 and MMP13 
expression. The present results suggested a regulatory role for Sirt1 in RA 
pathogenesis, and demonstrated the beneficial effects of resveratrol, which may 
have potential as an alternative therapeutic strategy for the treatment of 
patients with RA.
