Background: Tamarixinin A, a natural tannin isolated from Myricaria bracteata, 
has been confirmed to have moderate anti-inflammatory effects in vitro and in 
vivo. However, how it effects rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is still unknown. 
Therefore, the aim of this study is to investigate the therapeutic effects of 
tamarixinin A on experimental RA, and explore the underlying mechanism. Methods: 
The anti-arthritic effects of tamarixinin A were evaluated on collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) mice and adjuvant-induced arthritis (AIA) rats. The hind paw 
thickness, inflammatory cytokine levels in serum, and histopathological 
assessments were determined. The arthritis score was evaluated. Activation of 
p38 and p65 in AIA rats was also determined. The anti-inflammatory effect in 
vitro was also tested in LPS induced macrophages, and its related 
anti-inflammatory signaling pathways were explored. Results: Treatment with 
tamarixinin A significantly suppressed the progression and development of RA in 
CIA mice and AIA rats. Both in CIA mice and AIA rats, arthritis scores 
decreased, paw swelling and thickness were reduced, and joint destruction was 
alleviated. In AIA rats, tamarixinin A significantly inhibited the expression of 
p38, p-p38 and p65. In addition, tamarixinin A inhibited the production of 
pro-inflammatory mediators, the phosphorylation of p38, ERK, JNK and p65, as 
well as the nuclear translocation of p38 in LPS- induced macrophages. 
Conclusion: Tamarixinin A is a potential effective candidate compound for human 
RA treatment, which executes anti-arthritic effects potentially through 
down-regulating MAPK and NF-ÎºB signal pathway activation.
