BACKGROUND: Immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked syndrome 
(IPEX) is a lethal autoimmune disease caused by mutations in the Foxp3 gene 
scurfin (scurfy). Immunosuppressive therapy for IPEX patients has been generally 
ineffective and has caused severe side effects, however curcumin has shown 
immune regulation properties for inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis, psoriasis, and inflammatory bowel diseases without side effects.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate whether curcumin would 
attenuate symptoms of IPEX in mouse model and would prolong its survival period.
METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were separated into scurfy or wild-type litter mate groups 
by genotyping, and each group subsequently was separated into 2 subgroups that 
were fed a 1% curcumin containing or normal diet from the last day of 
breast-feeding. After weaning, pups were fed either a 1% curcumin containing or 
normal diet until all scurfy mice die for survival data. To elucidate immune 
cell proportions in spleen and lymph nodes, cells were analyzed by 
flowcytometry. Cellular cytokine production was accessed to investigate the 
effects of curcumin in T cell differentiation in vitro.
RESULTS: Scurfy mice fed a 1% curcumin diet survived 4.0-fold longer compared to 
scurfy (92.5 days) mice fed a normal diet (23 days). A curcumin diet decreased 
all of the Th1/Th2/Th17 cell populations and attenuated diverse symptoms such as 
splenomegaly in scurfy mice. In vitro experiments showed that curcumin treatment 
directly decreased the Th1/Th2/Th17 cytokine production of IFN-Î³, IL-4, and 
IL-17A in CD4+ T cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Curcumin diet attenuated the scurfy-induced immune disorder, a 
model of IPEX syndrome, by inhibiting Th1/Th2/Th17 responses in mice. These 
results have implications for improving clinical therapy for patients with IPEX 
and other T cell related autoimmune diseases.
