Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kB ligand (RANKL) is a key factor in the 
differentiation and activation of osteoclasts. Suppressing osteoclastogenesis is 
considered an effective therapeutic approach for bone-destructive diseases, such 
as osteoporosis and rheumatoid arthritis. Sappanone A (SPNA), a homoisoflavanone 
compound isolated from the heartwood of Caesalpinia sappan, has been reported to 
exert anti-inflammatory effects; however, the effects of SPNA on 
osteoclastogenesis have not been investigated. In the present study, we describe 
for the first time that SPNA inhibits RANKL-induced osteoclastogenesis in mouse 
bone marrow macrophages (BMMs) and suppresses inflammation-induced bone loss in 
a mouse model. SPNA inhibited the formation of osteoclasts from BMMs, osteoclast 
actin-ring formation, and bone resorption in a concentration-dependent manner. 
At the molecular level, SPNA significantly inhibited RANKL-induced activation of 
the AKT/glycogen synthase kinase-3β (GSK-3β) signaling pathway without affecting 
its activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) JNK, p38, and 
ERK. In addition, SPNA suppressed the induction of nuclear factor of activated T 
cells cytoplasmic 1 (NFATc1), which is a crucial transcription factor in 
osteoclast differentiation. As a result, SPNA decreased 
osteoclastogenesis-related marker gene expression, including CtsK, TRAP, 
dendritic cell-specific transmembrane protein (DC-STAMP), MMP-9 and 
osteoclast-associated receptor (OSCAR). In a mouse inflammatory bone loss model, 
SPNA significantly inhibited lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced bone loss by 
suppressing the number of osteoclasts. Taken together, these findings suggest 
that SPNA inhibits osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption by inhibiting the 
AKT/GSK-3β signaling pathway and may be a potential candidate compound for the 
prevention and/or treatment of inflammatory bone loss.
