Osteoclasts are large multinucleated cells responsible for bone resorption. 
Excessive inflammatory activation of osteoclasts leads to bony erosions, which 
are the hallmark of several diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 
Salt-inducible kinases (SIK) constitute a subfamily of kinases comprising three 
members (SIK1, -2, and -3). Inhibition of SIK kinase activity induces an 
anti-inflammatory phenotype in macrophages. Since osteoclasts originate from 
precursors of macrophage origin, we hypothesized a role of SIK in 
osteoclastogenesis. We analyzed SIK1, -2 and -3 expression and function in 
osteoclast differentiation using the mouse macrophage cell line RAW264.7 and 
bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMM). We show that all three SIK are expressed 
in fully differentiated osteoclasts and that in BMM-derived osteoclasts there is 
an increased expression of SIK1 and SIK3 proteins. Interestingly, the pan-SIK 
inhibitor HG-9-91-01 significantly inhibited osteoclastogenesis by dose 
dependently reducing osteoclast differentiation markers (i.e. CathepsinK, MMP-9 
and TRAP) and bone resorbing activity. Analysis of the signaling pathways 
activated by RANKL in RAW cells showed that SIK inhibitors did not affect 
RANKL-induced ERK1/2, JNK, p38 or NF-ÎºB activation, but induced a significant 
downregulation in c-Fos and NFATc1 protein levels, the two main transcription 
factors involved in the regulation of osteoclast-specific genes. Moreover, SIK 
inhibition partially increased the proteasome-mediated degradation of c-Fos. 
SIK2 and SIK3 knockout RAW cells were generated by the CRISPR/Cas9 approach. 
SIK2 KO and, to a lesser extent, SIK3 KO recapitulated the effect of SIK small 
molecule inhibitor, thus confirming the specificity of the effect of SIK 
inhibition on the reduction of osteoclastogenesis. Overall, our results support 
the notion that the SIK signaling pathway plays a significant role among the 
check-points controlling osteoclastogenesis. SIK kinase inhibitors could thus 
represent a potential novel therapy to prevent bone erosions.
