Iguratimod is known for its anti‑inflammatory activities and therapeutic effects 
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. It has previously been demonstrated that 
iguratimod attenuates bone destruction and osteoclast formation in the 
Walker 256 rat mammary gland carcinoma cell‑induced bone cancer pain model. 
Therefore, it was hypothesized that iguratimod may additionally exhibit 
therapeutic effects on benign osteoclast‑associated diseases including 
postmenopausal osteoporosis. In the present study, ovariectomized mice were used 
to investigate the effects of iguratimod in vivo. Bone marrow mononuclear cells 
were cultured to detect the effects of iguratimod on receptor activator of 
nuclear factor‑κB ligand (RANKL)‑induced osteoclastogenesis in vitro and the 
molecular mechanisms involved. It was demonstrated that iguratimod may prevent 
ovariectomy‑induced bone loss by suppressing osteoclast activity in vivo. 
Consistently, iguratimod may inhibit RANKL‑induced osteoclastogenesis and bone 
resorption in primary bone marrow mononuclear cells. At the molecular level, 
peroxisome proliferator‑activated receptor‑γ (PPAR‑γ)/c‑Fos pathway, which is 
essential in RANKL‑induced osteoclast differentiation, was suppressed by 
iguratimod. Subsequently, iguratimod decreased the expression of nuclear factor 
of activated T cells c1 and downstream osteoclast marker genes. The results of 
the present study demonstrated that iguratimod may inhibit ovariectomy‑induced 
bone loss and osteoclastogenesis by modulating RANKL signaling. Therefore, 
iguratimod may act as a novel therapeutic to prevent postmenopausal 
osteoporosis.
