BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease treated 
by nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) including lornoxicam (LX). 
Nanocarriers have been used to increase the efficacy and reduce the side effects 
of various drugs. The objective of the present study was to compare the 
therapeutic efficacy of systemic administration of lornoxicam-loaded 
nanomicellar formula (LX-NM) with that of free LX.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The LX-loaded mixed polymeric nanomicellar formula was 
prepared by direct equilibrium technique. Two rat models were used in the study: 
carrageenan-induced acute edema and Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA)-induced 
chronic arthritis.
RESULTS: The inhibitory effect of LX-NM on carrageenan-induced edema was higher 
than free LX for the same dose (1.3 mg/kg, i.p.). LX-NM (0.325 mg/kg, i.p.) 
produced effects comparable to that of diclofenac, which served as a standard. 
In the FCA model, daily treatment with LX-NM (0.325 mg/kg, i.p.) starting on day 
14 significantly reduced the percentage of edema and increased weight growth. 
However, the same dose of LX failed to confer any significant change. 
Additionally, LX-NM significantly attenuated the rise of tumor necrosis factor-α 
(TNF-α), interleukin-1β, prostaglandin E2, nuclear factor-κβ, malondialdehyde 
and nitric oxide serum levels. In contrast, LX failed to show any significant 
reduction in elevated serum biomarkers except for TNF-α.
CONCLUSION: LX-NM is an alternative delivery system that is simply prepared at 
low costs. It showed a superior therapeutic efficacy against RA compared to free 
LX. Thus, LX-NM can be considered as a promising candidate for treatment of RA 
and similar inflammatory disorders.
