Our previous experiments found that lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2) may be a useful 
preclinical serological marker for pulmonary fibrosis in the mouse model. The 
role of LOXL2 in rheumatoid arthritis-associated interstitial lung disease 
(RA-ILD) is still unclear. We investigated whether serum LOXL2 levels are 
associated with RA-ILD patients. The levels of serum LOXL2 were measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay in 49 RA-ILD patients (21 patients with ILD 
disease duration < 3 months; 28 patients with ILD disease duration > 3 months), 
43 RA patients without ILD and 20 normal healthy controls. We assessed the 
correlations between the serum LOXL2 levels and clinical variables. Serum LOXL2 
levels were significantly higher in RA patients than in normal healthy controls 
(326.79 ± 192.56 vs. 53.27 ± 35.86 pg/ml, P < 0.01). No significant difference 
was present between the RA-ILD group and RA without ILD group (298.87 ± 219.85 
vs. 358.60 ± 152.16 pg/ml, P = 0.13). Notably, the serum LOXL2 levels were 
significantly higher in patients with ILD disease duration < 3 months than in 
those with ILD disease duration > 3 months (462.71 ± 208.97 vs. 
175.99 ± 130.55 pg/ml, P < 0.01) or without ILD (462.71 ± 208.97 vs. 
358.60 ± 152.16 pg/ml, P = 0.03). The serum LOXL2 levels in RA-ILD patients 
significantly correlated with DAS28 (rs = 0.31, P = 0.034), C-reactive protein 
(rs = 0.41, P = 0.004), rheumatoid factor (rs = 0.41, P = 0.003), forced vital 
capacity (rs = - 0.39, P = 0.02), and diffusion capacity of the lung for carbon 
monoxide (rs = - 0.44, P = 0.009). LOXL2 may be involved in the pathogenesis of 
rheumatoid arthritis-associated interstitial lung disease and might be helpful 
in early diagnosis of RA-ILD.
