Despite a broad spectrum of anti-arthritic drugs currently on the market, there 
is a constant demand to develop improved therapeutic agents. Efficient compound 
screening and rapid evaluation of treatment efficacy in animal models of 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) can accelerate the development of clinical candidates. 
Compound screening by evaluation of disease phenotypes in animal models 
facilitates preclinical research by enhancing understanding of human 
pathophysiology; however, there is still a continuous need to improve methods 
for evaluating disease. Current clinical assessment methods are challenged by 
the subjective nature of scoring-based methods, time-consuming longitudinal 
experiments, and the requirement for better functional readouts with relevance 
to human disease. To address these needs, we developed a low-touch, digital 
platform for phenotyping preclinical rodent models of disease. As a 
proof-of-concept, we utilized the rat collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model of 
RA and developed the Digital Arthritis Index (DAI), an objective and automated 
behavioral metric that does not require human-animal interaction during the 
measurement and calculation of disease parameters. The DAI detected the 
development of arthritis similar to standard in vivo methods, including ankle 
joint measurements and arthritis scores, as well as demonstrated a positive 
correlation to ankle joint histopathology. The DAI also determined responses to 
multiple standard-of-care (SOC) treatments and nine repurposed compounds 
predicted by the SMarTRTM Engine to have varying degrees of impact on RA. The 
disease profiles generated by the DAI complemented those generated by standard 
methods. The DAI is a highly reproducible and automated approach that can be 
used in-conjunction with standard methods for detecting RA disease progression 
and conducting phenotypic drug screens.
