There are reports of sulfasalazine (Salazosulfapyridine; SASP)-induced 
reproductive toxicity, but there it is not known whether the SASP molecule or 
its intestinal metabolites are responsible for this effect. Rats received SASP 
(150, 300, and 600mg/kg) for 60 consecutive days (in vivo). Additionally, 
epididymal sperm was isolated and incubated with SASP (10μM-1600μM) (in vitro). 
Markers of oxidative stress, mitochondrial function, and sperm functionality, 
along with testis histopathology as well as several steroidogenic genes and 
proteins, including steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) protein, cytochrome 
P450 side chain cleavage enzyme (P450scc; Cyp11a), 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase (3β-HSD), 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (17β-HSD) were 
measured. SASP toxicity was evident as shown by severe testicular 
histopathological alterations, along with poor sperm parameters and increased 
markers of oxidative stress. Plasma testosterone level and 
steroidogenesis-related gene and protein (StAR, 3-beta-HSD, 17-beta-HSD) 
expressions, as well as mitochondrial membrane potential, were significantly 
decreased at high doses of SASP (in vivo). Interestingly, in vitro treatment of 
sperm with SASP not only caused no significant detrimental effect on rat sperm 
but also increased parameters of sperm functionality and decreased markers of 
oxidative stress. SASP had paradoxical actions on the rat sperm in these 
experimental models. The findings might be useful in understanding the 
mechanism(s) of SASP-induced reproductive toxicity. The present findings have 
opened a new molecular window into the relationship between disrupted 
steroidogenesis and mammalian reproduction indices and also are vital regarding 
clinical administration of SASP and human reproductive health.
