Experimental models of autoimmune diseases have revealed the disease protective 
role of heat shock proteins (HSPs). Both the administration of exogenous 
extracellular, mostly recombinant, HSP and the experimental co-induction of 
endogenous intracellular HSP in models have been shown to lead to production of 
disease protective regulatory T cells (Tregs). Similar to HSP taken up from 
extracellular bodily fluids, due to stress-related autophagy upregulated HSP 
also from intracellular sources is a major provider for the major 
histocompatibility class II (MHCII) ligandome; therefore, both extracellular and 
intracellular HSP can be prominent targets of Treg. The development of 
therapeutic peptide vaccines for the restoration of immune tolerance in 
inflammatory diseases is an area of intensive research. In this area, HSPs are a 
target for tolerance-inducing T-cell therapy, because of their wide expression 
in inflamed tissues. In humans, in whom the actual disease trigger is frequently 
unknown, HSP peptides offer chances for tolerance-promoting interventions 
through induction of HSP-specific Treg. Recently, we have shown the ability of a 
bacterial HSP70-derived peptide, HSP70-B29, to induce HSP-specific Tregs that 
suppressed arthritis by cross-recognition of their mammalian HSP70 homologues, 
abundantly present in the MHCII ligandome of stressed mouse and human 
antigen-presenting cells in inflamed tissues.This article is part of the theme 
issue 'Heat shock proteins as modulators and therapeutic targets of chronic 
disease: an integrated perspective'.
