BACKGROUND: Osteoclasts are bone resorbing cells and are responsible for bone 
erosion in diseases as diverse as osteoporosis, periodontitis, and rheumatoid 
arthritis. Fexaramine has been developed as an agonist for the farnesoid X 
receptor (FXR). This study investigated the effects of fexaramine on receptor 
activator of nuclear factor (NF)-κB ligand (RANKL)-induced osteoclast formation 
and signaling pathways.
METHODS: Osteoclasts were formed by culturing mouse bone marrow-derived 
macrophages (BMMs) with macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and RANKL. 
Bone resorption assays were performed using dentine slices. The mRNA expression 
level was analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Western blotting 
assays were conducted to detect the expression or activation level of proteins. 
Lipopolysaccharide-induced osteoclast formation was performed using a mouse 
calvarial model.
RESULTS: Fexaramine inhibited RANKL-induced osteoclast formation, without 
cytotoxicity. Furthermore, fexaramine diminished the RANKL-stimulated bone 
resorption. Mechanistically, fexaramine blocked the RANKL-triggered p38, 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase, and glycogen synthase kinase 3β 
phosphorylation, resulting in suppressed expression of c-Fos and NF of activated 
T cells (NFATc1). Consistent with the in vitro anti-osteoclastogenic effect, 
fexaramine suppressed lipopolysaccharide-induced osteoclast formation in the 
calvarial model.
CONCLUSIONS: The present data suggest that fexaramine has an inhibitory effect 
on osteoclast differentiation and function, via downregulation of NFATc1 
signaling pathways. Thus, fexaramine could be useful for the treatment of bone 
diseases associated with excessive bone resorption.
