BACKGROUND: The prevalence of atrial fibrillation (AF) is significantly higher 
in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients, but the underlying mechanisms remain 
poorly understood. The goal of this study was to assess the effects of RA on AF 
susceptibility and atrial arrhythmogenic remodeling in a rat model of RA.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Collagen-induced arthritis was induced in rats by 
immunization with type II collagen in Freund's incomplete adjuvant. Among the 
rats that developed arthritis, AF susceptibility and atrial remodeling were 
examined 8 weeks after the primary immunization. AF inducibility and duration 
were substantially increased in collagen-induced arthritis rats, and AF duration 
was significantly and positively correlated with the serum IL-6 and TNF-α 
levels. Rats with collagen-induced arthritis showed prolonged atrial conduction 
time with no changes in the atrial effective refractory period. Atrial 
conduction delay was accompanied by significantly increased atrial fibrosis. In 
addition, atrial structural and autonomic remodeling, including left atrial 
dilation, apoptosis and autophagy of atrial myocytes, and atrial heterogeneous 
sympathetic hyperinnervation, was observed. Interestingly, we found that 
collagen-induced arthritis had no significant effects on connexins, Nav1.5, and 
the main ion channels' protein expressions in atria.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that RA increased AF susceptibility by inducing 
AF-promoting atrial remodeling. This study may provide insights into mechanisms 
underlying RA-induced AF and validate a model that is suitable for further 
mechanistic and therapeutic exploration.

© 2017 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley.
