Genetic absence of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) reduces 
arthritis progression in the collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model to an 
extent just shy of disease abrogation, but this remarkable observation has not 
been translated into therapeutic intervention. Our aim was to test the potential 
in mice of an Ab that blocks the proteolytic capacity of uPA in the CIA model 
and the delayed-type hypersensitivity arthritis model. A second aim was to 
determine the cellular origins of uPA and the uPA receptor (uPAR) in joint 
tissue from patients with rheumatoid arthritis. A mAb that neutralizes mouse uPA 
significantly reduced arthritis progression in the CIA and delayed-type 
hypersensitivity arthritis models. In the CIA model, the impact of anti-uPA 
treatment was on par with the effect of blocking TNF-Î± by etanercept. A 
pharmacokinetics evaluation of the therapeutic Ab revealed target-mediated drug 
disposition consistent with a high turnover of endogenous uPA. The cellular 
expression patterns of uPA and uPAR were characterized by double 
immunofluorescence in the inflamed synovium from patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis and compared with synovium from healthy donors. The arthritic synovium 
showed expression of uPA and uPAR in neutrophils, macrophages, and a fraction of 
endothelial cells, whereas there was little or no expression in synovium from 
healthy donors. The data from animal models and human material provide 
preclinical proof-of-principle that validates uPA as a novel therapeutic target 
in rheumatic diseases.
