Porphyromonas gingivalis is one of the major oral pathogens implicated in the 
widespread inflammatory disorder periodontitis. Moreover, in recent years, P. 
gingivalis has been associated with the autoimmune disease rheumatoid arthritis. 
The peptidylarginine deiminase enzyme of P. gingivalis (PPAD) is a major 
virulence factor that catalyzes the citrullination of both bacterial and host 
proteins, potentially contributing to production of anticitrullinated protein 
antibodies. Considering that these antibodies are very specific for rheumatoid 
arthritis, PPAD appears to be a link between P. gingivalis, periodontitis, and 
the autoimmune disorder rheumatoid arthritis. PPAD was thus far considered 
unique among prokaryotes, with P. gingivalis being the only bacterium known to 
produce and secrete it. To challenge this hypothesis, we investigated the 
possible secretion of PPAD by 11 previously collected Porphyromonas isolates 
from a dog, 2 sheep, 3 cats, 4 monkeys, and a jaguar with periodontitis. Our 
analyses uncovered the presence of secreted PPAD homologues in 8 isolates that 
were identified as Porphyromonas gulae (from a dog, monkeys, and cats) and 
Porphyromonas loveana (from sheep). In all 3 PPAD-producing Porphyromonas 
species, the dominant form of the secreted PPAD was associated with outer 
membrane vesicles, while a minor fraction was soluble. Our results prove for the 
first time that the citrullinating PPAD exoenzyme is not unique to only 1 
prokaryotic species. Instead, we show that PPAD is produced by at least 2 other 
oral pathogens.
