Activated macrophages have been known to play pivotal roles in the pathogenesis 
of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). 18F-FEDAC 
(N-benzyl-N-methyl-2-[7,8-dihydro-7-(2-18F-fluoroethyl)-8-oxo-2-phenyl-9H-purin-9-yl]acetamide) 
is a radiolabeled ligand for the 18-kDa translocator protein (TSPO), which is 
abundant in activated macrophages. We evaluated the feasibility of using 
18F-FEDAC in a murine RA model. Methods: RAW 264.7 mouse macrophages were 
activated by lipopolysaccharide. TSPO expression levels in activated and 
inactivated macrophages were measured by quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
and Western blotting. The cellular uptake and specific binding of 18F-FEDAC were 
measured using a Î³-counter. For the in vivo study, collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA) was developed in DBA/1 mice, and the clinical score for arthritis was 
measured regularly. 18F-FEDAC and 18F-FDG PET images were acquired on days 23 
and 37 after the first immunization. Histologic examinations were performed to 
evaluate macrophages and TSPO expression. Results: We found increased TSPO 
messenger RNA and protein expression in activated macrophages. Uptake of 
18F-FEDAC in activated macrophages was higher than that in nonactivated cells 
and was successfully blocked by the competitor, PK11195. In CIA mice, joint 
swelling was apparent on day 26 after the first immunization, and the condition 
worsened by day 37. 18F-FEDAC uptake by arthritic joints increased early on (day 
23), whereas 18F-FDG uptake did not. However, 18F-FDG uptake by arthritic joints 
markedly increased at later stages (day 37) to a higher level than 18F-FEDAC 
uptake. The 18F-FEDAC uptake correlated weakly with summed severity score (P = 
0.019, r = 0.313), whereas the 18F-FDG uptake correlated strongly with summed 
severity score (P < 0.001, r = 0.897). Histologic sections of arthritic joints 
demonstrated an influx of macrophages compared with that in normal joints. 
Conclusion:18F-FEDAC enabled the visualization of active inflammation sites in 
arthritic joints in a CIA model by targeting TSPO expression in activated 
macrophages. The results suggest the potential usefulness of 18F-FEDAC imaging 
in the early phase of RA.
