Aspasomes of methotrexate with antioxidant, ascorbyl palmitate, were developed 
and optimized using factorial design by varying parameters such as lipid molar 
ratio, drug to lipid molar ratio, and type of hydration buffer for transdermal 
delivery for disease modifying activity in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Aspasomes 
were characterized by drug-excipients interaction, particle size analysis, 
determination of zeta potential, entrapment efficiency, and surface properties. 
The best formulation was loaded into hydrogel for evaluation of in vitro drug 
release and tested in vivo against adjuvant induced arthritis model in wistar 
rats, by assessing various physiological, biochemical, hematological, and 
histopathological parameters. Optimized aspasome formulation exhibited smooth 
surface with particle size 386.8 nm, high drug loading (19.41%), negative 
surface potential, and controlled drug release in vitro over 24 h with a steady 
permeation rate. Transdermal application of methotrexate-loaded aspasome 
hydrogel for 12 days reduced rat paw diameter (21.25%), SGOT (40.43%), SGPT 
(54.75%), TNFα (33.99%), IL β (34.79%), cartilage damage (84.41%), inflammation 
(82.37%), panus formation (84.38%), and bone resorption (80.52%) as compared to 
arthritic control rats. Free methotrexate-treated group showed intermediate 
effects. However, drug-free aspasome treatment did not show any effect. The 
experimental results indicate a positive outcome in development of drug-loaded 
therapeutically active carrier system which presents a non-invasive controlled 
release transdermal formulation with good drug loading, drug permeation rate, 
and having better disease modifications against RA than the free drug, thereby 
providing a more attractive therapeutic strategy for rheumatoid disease 
management.
