Fibroblast like synoviocyte (FLS) is a crucial in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA), and involved in inflammation and joint destruction. Sinomenine 
(SIN), an alkaloid derived from the plant Sinomenium acutum, has 
anti-inflammatory and analgesic effect and been used for RA treatment in China. 
Alpha 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (α7nAChR), as the key receptor in 
cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway (CAP) to inhibit inflammation, has been 
detected in RA patients synovium, but its role is still unclear. Here we 
investigated the association between the aggressive proliferation of FLS and 
α7nAChR expression and the effect of sinomenine. FLS was isolated from synovial 
tissues of adjuvant-induced-arthritis (AIA) rat. Tumor necrosis factor(TNF)-α 
was used to induce the aggressive proliferation of FLS. MTT assay was applied to 
evaluate the proliferation of FLS. The messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels 
of α7nAChR and early growth response gene-1 (Egr-1) were measured. The results 
showed that TNF-α induced FLS proliferation in vitro (P < .01) and increased the 
phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and the expression of Egr-1 and α7nAChR (P < .05 or 
P < .01). U0126, the inhibitor of ERK1/2 inhibited α7nAChR expression and FLS 
proliferation significantly (P < .05 or P < .01). Specific short interference 
RNA(siRNA) of α7nAChR decreased α7nAChR expression and inhibited FLS 
proliferation as well. SIN inhibited the proliferation of FLS and decreased the 
phosphorylation of ERK1/2, and the expression of Egr-1 and α7nAChR induced by 
TNF-α (P < .05). In conclusion, the expression of α7nAChR involved in the 
aggressive proliferation of FLS induced by TNF-α and was regulated by ERK/Egr-1 
signal pathway. SIN inhibited FLS proliferation and α7nAChR expression through 
inhibiting ERK/Egr-1 signal pathway, this may contribute to the 
anti-inflammatory and anti-arthritic effect of SIN.
