OBJECTIVES: Reactive oxygen species (ROS)-produced oxidative disorders were 
involved at the pathophysiology of many inflammatory processes via the 
generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and antioxidant defense system 
suppression. Although herbal antioxidants as mono-therapy relief many 
inflammatory diseases including, autoimmunity rheumatoid arthritis, but as 
combination therapy with other proven anti-inflammatory drugs in order to 
decreasing their toxic impacts has not yet been studied clearly, especially 
against chemical substances that's induced local inflammation with 
characteristic edema.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Grape seeds extract (GSE) at a concentration of 40 mg/kg 
B. wt alone or in combination with indomethacin (Indo.) at a dose of 5 mg/Kg B. 
wt orally given for 10 days prior (gps VI, VII, VIII) or as a single dose after 
edema induction (gps IX, X, XI) in rat's left hind paw by sub-planter single 
injection of 0.1 carrageenan: saline solution (1%) (gp. V) to assess the 
prophylactic and therapeutic anti-inflammatory activities of both through the 
estimation of selective inflammatory mediators and oxidative damage-related 
biomarkers as well as tissue mast cell scoring. Furthermore, both substances 
were given alone (gps II, III, IV) for their blood, liver and kidney safety 
evaluation comparing with negative control rats (gp. I) which kept without 
medication.
RESULTS: A marked reduction on the inflammatory mediators, edema volume and 
oxidative byproducts in edema bearing rats' prophylactic and treated with grape 
seeds extract and indomethacin was observed. Indomethacin found to induce some 
toxicological impacts which minimized when administered together with GSE.
CONCLUSION: GSE is a safe antioxidant agent with anti-inflammatory property.
