Euglena gracilis Z is a microorganism classified as a microalga and is used as a 
food or nutritional supplement. Paramylon, the carbohydrate storage substance of 
E. gracilis Z, is reported to affect the immunological system. This study 
evaluated the symptom-relieving effects of E. gracilis Z and paramylon in 
rheumatoid arthritis in a collagen-induced arthritis mouse model. The efficacy 
of both substances was assessed based on clinical arthritis signs, as well as 
cytokine (interleukin [IL]-17, IL-6, and interferon [IFN]-γ) levels in lymphoid 
tissues. Additionally, the knee joints were harvested and histopathologically 
examined. The results showed that both substances reduced the transitional 
changes in the visual assessment score of arthritis symptoms compared with those 
in the control group, indicating their symptom-relieving effects on rheumatoid 
arthritis. Furthermore, E. gracilis Z and paramylon significantly reduced the 
secretion of the cytokines, IL-17, IL-6, and IFN-γ. The histopathological 
examination of the control group revealed edema, inflammation, cell hyperplasia, 
granulation tissue formation, fibrosis, and exudate in the synovial membrane, as 
well as pannus formation and articular cartilage destruction in the femoral 
trochlear groove. These changes were suppressed in both treatment groups. 
Particularly, the E. gracilis Z group showed no edema, inflammation, and 
fibrosis of the synovial membrane, or pannus formation and destruction of 
articular cartilage in the femoral trochlear groove. Furthermore, E. gracilis Z 
and paramylon exhibited symptom-relieving effects on rheumatoid arthritis and 
suppressed the secretion of cytokines IL-17, IL-6, and IFN-γ. These effects were 
likely mediated by the regulatory activities of E. gracilis Z and paramylon on 
Th17 immunity. In addition, the symptom-relieving effects of both substances 
were comparable, which suggests that paramylon is the active component of 
Euglena gracilis Z.
