Despite improved therapy, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) remains an unmet medical 
need. Previous efforts to validate therapeutic targets in the mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) family have had minimal success. Therefore, we evaluated 
the potential for targeting an upstream MAPK, namely apoptosis signal-regulating 
kinase 1 (ASK1), as an alternative approach. ASK1 protein and gene expression 
were observed in RA and osteoarthritis (OA) synovium as determined by 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and qPCR, respectively, particularly in the synovial 
intimal lining. For RA, but not OA synovium, ASK1 correlated with IL-1β and TNF 
gene expression. ASK1 was also expressed by cultured fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes (FLS), with significantly higher levels in RA compared with OA 
cells. IL-1β and TNF stimulation significantly increased ASK1 expression in a 
time-and concentration-dependent manner in cultured FLS. ASK1 promoter activity 
was significantly increased by IL-1β and TNF and was dependent on an upstream 
RelA binding motif. A selective small molecule ASK1 inhibitor reduced RA FLS 
invasion, migration and proliferation in vitro and decreased arthritis severity 
in the rat collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) model. In summary, our findings 
demonstrate that ASK1 modulates signaling pathways relevant to RA in vitro and 
in vivo. It is induced by inflammatory cytokines through the activation of 
NF-κB, which could provide some site- and event specificity. Thus, inhibitors of 
the upstream MAPK ASK1 could be a novel approach to treating inflammatory 
arthritis.
