Neuroinflammation plays a crucial role in expression of symptoms of numerous 
autoimmune and neurodegenerative diseases such as pain during rheumatoid 
arthritis. Overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and activation of 
intracellular signaling pathways have been strongly implicated in the generation 
of pathological pain states, particularly at central nervous system sites and 
induction of spinal neuroinflammatory symptoms. The wide ranges of research to 
define new therapeutic approaches, including neuroimmune-modulators like stem 
cells are in progress. Mesenchymal stem cells conditioned medium (MSC-CM) has 
anti-inflammatory factors which can regulate the immune responses. The aim of 
this study was to investigate the effect of administration of MSC-CM on 
behavioral, cellular and molecular aspects of adjuvant-induced arthritis in male 
Wistar rats. Complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA)-induced arthritis (AA) was caused 
by single subcutaneous injection of CFA into the rat's hind paw on day 0. MSC-CM 
was administered daily (i.p.) and during the 21 days of the study after 
injection. Hyperalgesia, Edema, Serum TNF-α levels and p38MAPK and NF-κB 
activities were assessed on days 0,7,14 and 21 of the study. The results of this 
study indicated the role of MSC-CM in reducing inflammatory symptoms, serum 
TNF-α levels and activity of intracellular signaling pathway factors during 
different phases of inflammation caused by CFA. It seems that MSC-CM treatment 
due to its direct effects on inhibition of intracellular signaling pathways and 
pro-inflammatory cytokines can alleviate inflammatory symptoms and pain during 
CFA-induced arthritis.
