BACKGROUND Norepinephrine (NE), a neurotransmitter released from the sympathetic 
nerves, has been shown to be involved in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, its 
role in the sympathetic nervous system in RA is divergent. Herein, we 
demonstrate that the sympathetic neurotransmitter NE exerts an anti-inflammatory 
effect in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA), a mouse model of RA, by inhibiting 
Th17 cell differentiation and function via β2-adrenergic receptor (β2-AR) 
signaling. MATERIAL AND METHODS CIA was prepared by intradermal injection of 
collagen type II in the tail base of DBA1/J mice. On the 41st day 
post-immunization, the mice were used as CIA models. CD4+ T cells from the 
spleen were purified using magnetic cell sorting and activated with anti-CD3 
anti-CD28 antibodies. Th17 cells were polarized from the CD4+ T cells using 
various antibodies and cytokines. RESULTS Co-expression of CD4 and β2-AR was 
observed in spleens of both intact and CIA mice. The β2-AR expression in the 
ankle and spleen was downregulated in CIA mice. CIA induced increases in 
production of interleukin (IL)-17 and IL-22, CD25-IL-17+ cell percentage, and 
ROR-γt expression in CD4+ T cells. Importantly, NE reduced the CIA-induced CD4+ 
T cell shift towards Th17 phenotype, and the β2-AR antagonist ICI118551 blocked 
the NE effect. Moreover, the β2-AR agonist terbutaline (Terb) inhibited 
CIA-induced CD4+ T cell proliferation and shift towards Th17 phenotype, and the 
protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor H-89 abolished the agonist effect. Terb also 
reduced CIA-induced Th17 enhancement, and H-89 impaired the Terb effect. 
CONCLUSIONS NE inhibits Th17 cell differentiation and function in CIA condition 
by activation of β2-AR/PKA signaling.
