A single nucleotide polymorphism in Ncf1 has been found with a major effect on 
chronic inflammatory autoimmune diseases in the rat with the surprising 
observation that a lower reactive oxygen response led to more severe diseases. 
This finding was subsequently reproduced in the mouse and the effect operates in 
many different murine diseases through different pathogenic pathways; like 
models for rheumatoid arthritis, encephalomyelitis, lupus, gout, psoriasis and 
psoriatic arthritis. The human gene is located in an unstable region with many 
variable sequence repetitions, which means it has not been included in any 
genome wide associated screens so far. However, identification of copy number 
variations and single nucleotide polymorphisms has now clearly shown that major 
autoimmune diseases are strongly associated with the Ncf1 locus. In systemic 
lupus erythematosus the associated Ncf1 polymorphism (leading to an amino acid 
substitution at position 90) is the strongest locus and is associated with a 
lower reactive oxidative burst response. In addition, more precise mapping 
analysis of polymorphism of other NOX2 genes reveals that these are also 
associated with autoimmunity. The identified genetic association shows the 
importance of redox control and that ROS regulate chronic inflammation instead 
of promoting it. The genetic identification of Ncf1 polymorphisms now opens for 
relevant studies of the regulatory mechanisms involved, effects that will have 
severe consequences in many different pathogenic pathways and understanding of 
the origin of autoimmune diseases.
