BACKGROUND: To histologically evaluate lumbar involvement in rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA) by investigating rats with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) and 
to assess the potential effects of RA on the discovertebral joints and facet 
joints.
METHODS: Seven-month-old female Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into groups 
with CIA and without CIA (control). All rats were sacrificed at 8 weeks after 
initial sensitization and the lumbar spine (L5/6) was harvested. Then the lumbar 
spine block specimens were stained with Villaneuva bone stain and sectioned in 
the midsagittal plane. The left facet joints were also sectioned in the midaxial 
plane. Specimens were studied under a microscope and infiltration of 
inflammatory cells was investigated.
RESULTS: In the CIA group, lumbar lesions were observed in 13/18 rats (76%). 
Lymphocytes infiltrated into the anterior rim of the vertebral bodies only in 2 
rats, while lymphocytes infiltrated the facet joints only in 4 rats. Both sites 
were involved in 7 rats. In addition, osteoclasts invaded the anterior rim of 
the vertebral bodies and formed cavities that also contained lymphocytes. 
Formation of pannus was seen in the facet joints in 11/18 rats.
CONCLUSION: In CIA rats, infiltration of inflammatory cells into the anterior 
rim of the vertebral bodies alone or into the facet joints alone was 
demonstrated in 2 rats and 4 rats, respectively, while both sites were involved 
in 7 rats. Therefore, lesions at the anterior rim of the vertebral body did not 
arise secondary to facet joint involvement, but were caused by CIA along with 
synovial lesions of the facet joints.
