The deposition of IgG autoantibodies in peripheral tissues and the subsequent 
activation of the complement system, which leads to the accumulation of the 
anaphylatoxin C5a in these tissues, is a common hallmark of diverse autoimmune 
diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and pemphigoid diseases (PDs). C5a 
is a potent chemoattractant for granulocytes and mice deficient in its precursor 
C5 or its receptor C5aR1 are resistant to granulocyte recruitment and, 
consequently, to tissue inflammation in several models of autoimmune diseases. 
However, the mechanism whereby C5a/C5aR regulates granulocyte recruitment in 
these diseases has remained elusive. Mechanistic studies over the past five 
years into the role of C5a/C5aR1 in the K/BxN serum arthritis mouse model have 
provided novel insights into the mechanisms C5a/C5aR1 engages to initiate 
granulocyte recruitment into the joint. It is now established that the critical 
actions of C5a/C5aR1 do not proceed in the joint itself, but on the luminal 
endothelial surface of the joint vasculature, where C5a/C5aR1 mediate the arrest 
of neutrophils on the endothelium by activating Î²2 integrin. Then, C5a/C5aR1 
induces the release of leukotriene B4 (LTB4) from the arrested neutrophils. The 
latter, subsequently, initiates by autocrine/paracrine actions via its receptor 
BLT1 the egress of neutrophils from the blood vessel lumen into the 
interstitial. Compelling evidence suggests that this C5a/C5aR1-LTB4/BLT1 axis 
driving granulocyte recruitment in arthritis may represent a more generalizable 
biological principle critically regulating effector cell recruitment in other 
IgG autoantibody-induced diseases, such as in pemphigoid diseases. Thus, dual 
inhibition of C5a and LTB4, as implemented in nature by the lipocalin coversin 
in the soft-tick Ornithodoros moubata, may constitute a most effective 
therapeutic principle for the treatment of IgG autoantibody-driven diseases.
