Triggering of autoimmunity that leads to rheumatic disease has been suggested to 
depend upon gene-environment interactions occurring in epithelial barriers and 
associated immune cells. Genetic studies have identified associations of the 
FAM167A-BLK locus with rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 
and Sj√∂gren's syndrome. While BLK (B lymphocyte kinase) has a well-established 
role in B cells, family with sequence similarity to 167 member A (FAM167A) and 
its gene family remain uncharacterized. To begin to understand the role of 
FAM167A in rheumatic disease pathogenesis, we explored this gene family and 
cloned and investigated the gene products. Expression of quantitative trait 
locus analysis was performed in immune cells. FAM167A and FAM167B were cloned 
from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Gene conservation and 
protein properties were analysed by online tools, mRNA expression measured in 
mouse organs by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and protein 
expression investigated in human tissues by immunohistochemistry. We found that 
autoimmune risk genotypes within the FAM167A-BLK locus lead to increased 
expression of FAM167A. The FAM167 gene family includes two members, FAM167A and 
FAM167B, which are not homologous to any other annotated gene but are 
evolutionarily conserved. The encoded proteins, which we denote 'disordered 
autoimmunity' (DIORA)-1 and DIORA-2, respectively, are characterized by a high 
content of intrinsic disorder. Notably, DIORA-1 has its highest expression in 
the lung, detectable in both bronchial epithelium and alveolar macrophages with 
an endosomal localization pattern. In summary, the FAM167A gene is associated 
with several rheumatic diseases and encodes a novel disordered protein, DIORA-1, 
which is expressed highly in the lung, consistent with a potential role in 
disease pathogenesis.
