BACKGROUND: The T-helper 17 (Th17) cells have a prominent role in inflammation 
as well as in bone and join destruction in both rheumatoid and psoriatic 
arthritis (RA and PsA). Here, we studied Th17 cell differentiation in RA and 
PsA.
METHODS: Blood samples from healthy donors, RA and PsA patients were collected. 
CD45RO- (naive) and CD45RO+ (memory) T cells were isolated from peripherial 
blood mononuclear cell by magnetic separation. Naive T cells were stimulated 
with anti-CD3, anti-CD28, and goat anti-mouse IgG antibodies and treated with 
transforming grow factor beta, interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, and IL-23 cytokines 
and also with anti-IL-4 antibody. IL-17A and IL-22 production were measured by 
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay, RORC, and T-box 21 (TBX21) expression were 
analyzed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and flow cytometry. C-C 
chemokine receptor 6 (CCR6), CCR4, and C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 3 
expression were determined by flow cytometry. Cell viability was monitored by 
impedance-based cell analyzer (CASY-TT).
RESULTS: RORC, TBX21, CCR6, and CCR4 expression of memory T cells of healthy 
individuals (but not RA or PsA patients) were increased (p < 0.01; p < 0.001; 
p < 0.05; p < 0.05, respectively) compared to the naive cells. Cytokine-induced 
IL-17A production was different in both RA and PsA patients when compared to 
healthy donors (p = 0.0000026 and p = 0.0001047, respectively). By contrast, 
significant differences in IL-22 production were observed only between RA versus 
healthy or RA versus PsA patients (p = 0.000006; p = 0.0013454, respectively), 
but not between healthy donors versus PsA patients.
CONCLUSION: The naive CD4 T-lymphocytes are predisposed to differentiate into 
Th17 cells and the in vitro Th17 cell differentiation is profoundly altered in 
both RA and PsA.
