The present study aimed to investigate the anti‑arthritic effect of physcion 
8‑O‑β‑glucopyranoside (POGD) and its possible mechanisms. The anti‑proliferative 
effects of POGD on MH7A cells were detected using a CCK‑8 assay, and the release 
of pro‑inflammatory cytokines, interleukin (IL)‑1β, IL‑6, IL‑8, IL‑12 and 
IL‑17A, were determined by ELISA. A type II collagen‑induced arthritis (CIA) rat 
model was established to evaluate the anti‑arthritic effect of POGD in vivo. The 
paw volumes, arthritis indices and serum levels of tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)‑α, IL‑1β, IL‑6, IL‑8, IL‑17A were determined by ELISA. The mRNA expression 
levels of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)‑2, MMP‑3, MMP‑9, vascular endothelial 
growth factor and cyclooxygenase‑2 were determined by reverse 
transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis, and the 
expression levels of transforming growth factor (TGF)‑β1, small mothers against 
decapentaplegic (Smad)4, Smad7, c‑Jun N‑terminal kinase (JNK), phosphorylated 
(p‑)JNK, p‑P38, P38, p‑extracellular signal‑regulated kinase (ERK)1/2, ERK1/2, 
nuclear factor (NF)‑κB p65 in the nucleus (N), cytosolic NF‑κB p65 (C), and 
inhibitor of NF‑κB (IκB) were determined by western blot analysis. The results 
indicated that POGD significantly inhibited MH7A cell growth. POGD markedly 
inhibited paw swelling and the arthritis indices of the CIA rats, and POGD may 
also inhibit the release of pro‑inflammatory cytokines. Furthermore, POGD 
downregulated the expression levels of TGF‑β1, Smad4, NF‑κB p65 (N), p38, p‑p38, 
p‑ERK1/2, JNK, p‑JNK, TGF‑β1, Smad4, p‑JNK, JNK, p‑P38, P38, p‑ERK1/2, ERK1/2 
and NF‑κB p65 (N), and upregulated the Smad7, NF‑κB p65 (C) and IκB in TNF‑α 
induced MH7A cells. In conclusion, the results suggested that POGD is a 
promising potential anti‑inflammatory drug, and that POGD may decrease the 
expression of pro‑inflammatory cytokines and mediators via inhibiting the 
TGF‑β/NF‑κB/mitogen‑activated protein kinase pathways.
