It has been suggested that endoplasmic reticulum stress (ERS) may induce 
apoptosis following spinal cord injury (SCI). Methotrexate (MTX) has been used 
as a long-term therapy regimen for rheumatoid arthritis. However, it is not 
clear whether MTX remediates SCI by inhibiting ERS. In the present study, to 
establish an in vitro ERS cell model, PC12 cells were pre-incubated with 
triglycerides (TG). MTT assays revealed that treatment with 1, 2.5, 5 and 10 µM 
TG decreased PC12 cell viability in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, MTX 
treatment significantly reversed the TG-induced decrease in cell viability and 
increased apoptosis according to the flow cytometry assay (P<0.05). Notably, 
western blotting indicated that MTX significantly decreased levels of 
glucose-regulated protein (GRP)78, CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein homologous 
protein (CHOP) and caspase-12 expression (P<0.05), which were increased 
following treatment with TG. Furthermore, the in vivo role of MTX in a rat model 
of SCI was evaluated. The motor behavioral function of rats was improved 
following treatment with MTX according to Basso, Beattie and Bresnahan scoring 
(P<0.05). Terminal deoxynucleotidyl-transferase-mediated dUTP nick end staining 
indicated that there were no apoptotic cells present in sham rats. In the SCI 
model group, apoptotic cells were observed at day 7; however, the number of 
apoptotic cells was reduced following an additional 7 days of MTX 
administration. Furthermore, levels of ERS-associated proteins, including 
caspase-3, activating transcription factor 6, serine/threonine-protein 
kinase/endoribonuclease inositol-requiring enzyme 1 α, eukaryotic initiation 
factor 2 α and GRP78, were significantly increased following SCI; however, 
administration of MTX for 7 days significantly reversed this effect (P<0.05, 
P<0.01 and P<0.001). Therefore, MTX may improve SCI by suppressing ERS-induced 
apoptosis in vitro and in vivo.
