In this study, we synthesized hundreds of analogues based on the structure of 
small-molecule inhibitors (SMIs) that were previously identified in our 
laboratory with the aim of identifying potent yet safe compounds for arthritis 
therapeutics. One of the analogues was shown to share structural similarity with 
quercetin, a potent anti-inflammatory flavonoid present in many different fruits 
and vegetables. We investigated the immunomodulatory effects of this compound, 
namely 
6-(2,4-difluorophenyl)-3-(3-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)-2H-benzo[e][1,3]oxazine-2,4(3H)-dione 
(Cf-02), in a side-by-side comparison with quercetin. Chondrocytes were isolated 
from pig joints or the joints of patients with osteoarthritis that had undergone 
total knee replacement surgery. Several measures were used to assess the 
immunomodulatory potency of these compounds in tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF-&alpha;)-stimulated chondrocytes. Characterization included the protein and 
mRNA levels of molecules associated with arthritis pathogenesis as well as the 
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)‚Åªnitric oxide (NO) system and matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs) in cultured chondrocytes and proteoglycan, and 
aggrecan degradation in cartilage explants. We also examined the activation of 
several important transcription factors, including nuclear factor-kappaB 
(NF-&kappa;B), interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), signal transducer and 
activator of transcription-3 (STAT-3), and activator protein-1 (AP-1). Our 
overall results indicate that the immunomodulatory potency of Cf-02 is 
fifty-fold more efficient than that of quercetin without any indication of 
cytotoxicity. When tested in vivo using the induced edema method, Cf-02 was 
shown to suppress inflammation and cartilage damage. The proposed method shows 
considerable promise for the identification of candidate disease-modifying 
immunomodulatory drugs and leads compounds for arthritis therapeutics.
