Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease, characterized by the 
irreversible joint destruction resulted from the attack of inflammatory cells to 
the joints. Recent studies demonstrated that crocin is able to alleviate 
arthritis and suppress inflammatory responses, implying crocin as a potential 
promising antiarthritic agent. In this study, we confirmed the effect of crocin 
on RA and revealed its underlying mechanism by measuring lipopolysaccharides 
(LPS)-stimulated cytokine production in presence or absence of crocin. The 
effect of crocin was also tested in vivo using a mouse model of collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA). It was found that crocin significantly repressed the 
LPS-induced expression of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interleukin (IL)-1β, 
and IL-6 in human fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). We tested the effect of 
crocin on nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) signaling and observed that cells 
pre-treated with 500 μM of crocin exhibited lower levels of LPS-induced p-IκBα, 
p-IκB kinase (IKK) α/β, and p65 expression than those of untreated cells. In 
addition, we found when cells were stimulated with IKKβ, crocin pre-treatment 
showed significantly inhibitory effect on the luciferase activity of IL-1β. In 
vivo results also showed that crocin treatment dramatically reduced plasma 
levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 in CIA mice. Crocin is efficient to suppress 
the productions of TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β by blocking NF-κB signal activation 
through its interaction with IKK, suggesting that crocin could be an efficient 
treatment for RA.
