Jatrorrhizine hydrochloride (JH), an active component isolated from the 
traditional Chinese herb Coptis chinensis, has been reported to have 
antimicrobial, antitumor, antihypercholesterolemic, and neuroprotective 
activities. However, its antirheumatoid arthritis (RA) property remains unknown. 
In this study, a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rat model was used to evaluate 
the therapeutic effects of JH on RA by using arthritis score, radiological 
evaluation, and histopathological assessment. The in vitro effects of JH on 
proliferation, migration, and production of inflammatory mediators in RA-derived 
fibroblast-like synoviocyte MH7A cells were determined by the EdU incorporation 
assay, wound healing assay, real-time PCR, and ELISA, respectively. The in vivo 
studies showed that JH treatment significantly prevented the progression and 
development of RA in CIA rats through anti-inflammation and suppressing bone 
destruction. The in vitro studies revealed that JH could effectively attenuate 
the destructive phenotypes of MH7A cells, including inhibiting proliferation, 
migration, and production of inflammatory mediators. Further mechanistic 
analysis demonstrated that JH suppressed tumor necrosis factor alpha 
(TNFα)-stimulated activations of nuclear factor of kappaB (NF-κB) and 
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) (ERK and p38) leading to the 
downregulation of proinflammatory cytokines, which might be beneficial to the 
antiproliferative and antimigratory activities of FLS cells. Collectively, our 
results demonstrated that JH has a great potential to be developed into a novel 
therapeutic agent for treating RA.
