Collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) is a frequently used animal model of rheumatoid 
arthritis, human autoimmune disease that exhibits clear sex bias in incidence 
and clinical course. Female Dark Agouti rats immunized for CIA showed also 
greater incidence and higher arthritic score than their male counterparts. The 
study investigated sex differences in mechanisms controlling the primary immune 
responses in draining lymph nodes (dLNs), as a factor contributing to this 
dimorphism. The higher frequencies of CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3- cells, presumably 
activated effector T (Teff) cells, and IL-17+, IFN-γ + and IL-17 + IFN-γ + T 
cells were found in female compared with male rat dLNs. However, the frequency 
of CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3+ T regulatory cells (Treg) did not differ between sexes. 
Thus, CD4+ Teff cells/Treg ratio, and IL-17+ T cells/Treg and IFN-γ + T 
cells/Treg ratios were higher in female than in male rats, and among them was 
found lower frequency of PD-1+ cells. This suggested less efficient control of 
(auto)immune Th1/Th17 cell responses in female rat dLNs. On the contrary, the 
frequency of IL-4+ T cells was lower in female than in male rat dLNs. 
Consistently, the ratio of serum levels of collagen-specific IgG2a 
(IFN-γ-dependent, with an important pathogenic role in CIA) and IgG1 
(IL-4-dependent) was shifted towards IgG2a in female compared with male rats. As 
a whole, the study suggests that sexual dimorphism in the control of T cell 
activation/polarization could contribute to sex bias in the susceptibility to 
CIA. Moreover, the study advises the use of animals of both sexes in the 
preclinical testing of new drugs for rheumatoid arthritis.
