This research was designed to investigate the fracture healing pattern in a 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) rat model. A mid-shaft femur fracture (RA + F) model 
and normal fracture (NF) model as control were established. Micro-CT, H&E 
staining, TB staining, SO staining, tartrate-resistant acid phosphates, and 
immunohistochemistry test were performed. In the micro-CT images and H&E stains, 
fracture gaps were evident in the RA + F group 4 and 8 weeks after fracture. In 
detail, the bone mineral density, the ratio of bone volume to tissue volume, and 
trabecular thickness of the RA + F group were significantly lower than those of 
the NF group at all time points. Trabecular number value was significantly lower 
in the RA + F group 4 weeks after surgery in comparison with that of the NF 
group. Furthermore, the structure model index test result of the RA + F group 
was significantly higher than that of the NF group at all time points. TB 
staining and SO staining test results showed that the NF group had more 
cartilaginous callus in the earlier stage of bone healing process (4 weeks), and 
less cartilage callus formation in the later stage (8 weeks) in comparison with 
that of the RA + F group. Osteoclasts statistics score in the NF group were 
obviously lower than that of the RA + F group at all time points. MMP-3 and OPN 
protein levels of the fracture area in the RA + F group were significantly 
higher than those in the NF group. This study improves the understanding of the 
bone healing characteristics in patients with RA. © 2018 Orthopaedic Research 
Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 36:2876-2885, 2018.
