Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease, and 
excessive T lymphocyte activation plays a critical role in the development of 
inflammation. CD147 is an antigen related to T cell activation, CD147 blockade 
exerts beneficial effects on RA. FK506, also known as tacrolimus, exerts strong 
immunosuppressive effects by inhibiting T cell activation. In this study, RL73 
(an anti-mouse CD147 functional-grade purified antibody) and FK506 were 
co-administered to mice with collagen-induced arthritis (CIA). As expected, the 
combination of these two drugs produced superior therapeutic effects than either 
drug alone and enabled the administration of each drug at a lower dose. 
Moreover, joint damage and destruction were significantly improved in mice 
injected with both FK506 and RL73 compared with mice injected with either agent 
alone. These effects might have been observed because the proportions of CD4 + T 
and CD8 + T cells in the mouse spleen of the combination regimen were clearly 
decreased compared with each monotherapy. In addition, the proportions of Th2 
subsets in the mouse spleen and peripheral blood were clearly increased, and the 
serum levels of the cytokines interleukin 4 (IL-4) and IL-10 were markedly 
increased in mice treated with the combination therapy compared with the other 
groups of mice. The splenic total number of T lymphocytes also showed that the 
inhibition of T lymphocytes was the most obvious in the combined treatment 
group. Based on the results from the present study, combining FK506 and the 
anti-CD147 mAb might be a new practical therapeutic option for the treatment of 
RA.
