Bi qi capsule (BQC) is a traditional Chinese medicine prescription that is 
clinically used for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Strychnine and 
brucine, as two typical kinds of alkaloids, are the primary active and 
neurotoxic constituents of BQC. In this study, a sensitive and reliable rapid 
resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (RRLC-MS/MS) 
quantitative method was used to determine the concentrations of brucine and 
strychnine in rat brain and blood dialysates. The blood-brain barrier (BBB) 
penetration of free brucine and strychnine and their pharmacokinetic 
characteristics were investigated by the validated RRLC-MS/MS method coupled 
with in vivo microdialysis for the first time. The dialysate brain-blood AUC 
ratios of brucine were 0.098, 0.44 and 0.40 respectively at 0.4, 0.8 and 
1.6 g kg-1 doses of BQC, and the dialysate brain-blood AUC ratios of strychnine 
were 0.20, 1.25 and 2.06 respectively at 0.4, 0.8 and 1.6 g kg-1 doses of BQC. 
The high brain-blood AUC ratios of brucine and strychnine were observed in 
medium and high dose groups of BQC. In addition, the effects of P-glycoprotein 
(P-gp) and breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) on brucine and strychnine 
across BBB were also studied using the above method as well as molecular 
docking. The results prompted that brucine was the substrate of P-gp, and 
strychnine might be the inhibitor of P-gp. Brucine and strychnine showed high 
brain penetration, so it is very important to well control the clinic dosage of 
BQC and manufactory quality for avoiding the side effects and obtaining good 
therapeutic efficacy. Our study could be further used in investigating BBB 
penetration for other drugs caused neurotoxicity.
