Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) is a hematopoietic 
growth factor that can stimulate a variety of cells, but its overexpression 
leads to excessive production and activation of granulocytes and macrophages 
with many pathogenic effects. This cytokine is a therapeutic target in 
inflammatory diseases, and several anti-GM-CSF antibodies have advanced to Phase 
2 clinical trials in patients with such diseases, e.g., rheumatoid arthritis. 
GM-CSF is also an essential factor in preventing pulmonary alveolar proteinosis 
(PAP), a disease associated with GM-CSF malfunction arising most typically 
through the presence of GM-CSF neutralizing auto-antibodies. Understanding the 
mechanism of action for neutralizing antibodies that target GM-CSF is important 
for improving their specificity and affinity as therapeutics and, conversely, in 
devising strategies to reduce the effects of GM-CSF auto-antibodies in PAP. We 
have solved the crystal structures of human GM-CSF bound to antigen-binding 
fragments of two neutralizing antibodies, the human auto-antibody F1 and the 
mouse monoclonal antibody 4D4. Coordinates and structure factors of the crystal 
structures of the GM-CSF:F1 Fab and the GM-CSF:4D4 Fab complexes have been 
deposited in the RCSB Protein Data Bank under the accession numbers 6BFQ and 
6BFS, respectively. The structures show that these antibodies bind to mutually 
exclusive epitopes on GM-CSF; however, both prevent the cytokine from 
interacting with its alpha receptor subunit and hence prevent receptor 
activation. Importantly, identification of the F1 epitope together with 
functional analyses highlighted modifications to GM-CSF that would abolish 
auto-antibody recognition whilst retaining GM-CSF function. These results 
provide a framework for developing novel GM-CSF molecules for PAP treatment and 
for optimizing current anti-GM-CSF antibodies for use in treating inflammatory 
disorders.
