Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease that causes mild to 
severe joint inflammation. During RA pathogenesis, fibroblast-like synoviocytes 
(FLS) acquire a tumor-like phenotype and mediate cartilage destruction both 
directly and indirectly by producing proinflammatory cytokines and matrix 
metalloproteinases (MMPs). Kruppel-like factor (KLF) 4, a member of the KLF 
family, plays significant roles in cell survival, proliferation, and 
differentiation. A recent study reported increased expression of KLF4 in 
synovial tissue from RA patients. However, its precise role in RA in different 
models, including mouse autoimmune disease models, remains unclear. In this 
study, we examined the role of KLF4 during development of autoimmune arthritis 
in mouse models. To do this, we used KLF4 knockout mice rendered by ribonucleic 
acid (RNA)-guided endonuclease (RGEN) and performed collagen antibody-induced 
arthritis (CAIA). We found that deletion of KLF4 reduces inflammation induced by 
CAIA. In addition, we assessed collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) in control mice 
and KLF4-overexpressing mice generated by a minicircle vector treatment. 
Severity of CIA in mice overexpressing KLF4 was greater than that in mice 
injected with control vector. Finally, we verified the inflammatory roles of 
KLF4 in CIA by treating Kenpaullone which is used as KLF4 inhibitor. Next, we 
focused on human/mouse FLS to discover the cellular process involved in RA 
pathogenesis including proliferation, apoptosis, and inflammation including 
MMPs. In FLS, KLF4 upregulated expression of mRNA encoding proinflammatory 
cytokines interleukin (IL)-1Î² and IL-6. KLF4 also regulated expression of matrix 
metallopeptidase 13 in the synovium. We found that blockade of KLF4 in FLS 
increased apoptosis and suppressed proliferation followed by downregulation of 
antiapoptotic factor BCL2. Our results indicate that KLF4 plays a crucial role 
in pathogenesis of inflammatory arthritis in vivo, by regulating apoptosis, MMP 
expression, and cytokine expression by FLS. Thus, KLF4 might be a novel 
transcription factor for generating RA by modulating cellular process of FLS.
