Infection with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been associated with several 
autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We have previously 
reported that DNA from this virus enhances production of the pro-autoimmune 
interleukin 17A (IL-17A) in mice. In this study we assessed the effect of EBV 
DNA on regulatory T cell programming and examined whether it mediated its 
effects via Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) in mice; moreover, we evaluated whether 
EBV DNA in humans had similar effects to those seen in mice. For this purpose, 
we assessed the linearity of the correlation between EBV DNA and IL-17A levels 
in RA subjects and matched controls. A modulatory effect for the viral DNA was 
observed for regulatory T cell markers with an inhibitory effect observed for 
CTLA4 expression in the EBV DNA-treated mice. To examine whether TLR9 mediated 
the detection of EBV DNA and enhancement of IL-17A production, mouse peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells were treated with the DNA in the presence or absence of 
the TLR9 inhibitor ODN 2088. Subsequently, IL-17A production from these cells 
was assessed. Treatment with the TLR9 inhibitor resulted in a significant 
decrease in IL-17A production indicating that TLR9 is involved in this pathway. 
In human subjects, examining the linearity of the correlation between EBV DNA 
and IL-17A levels in RA subjects showed a propensity for linearity that was not 
observed in controls. Our data thus indicates that EBV DNA itself acts as a 
modulator of the Th17 compartment as well as that of regulatory T cell 
mechanisms. The involvement of TLR9 in the EBV DNA-triggered induction of IL-17A 
suggests therapeutic targeting of this endosomal receptor in EBV positive 
subjects with an autoimmune flare-up or possibly for prophylactic purposes.
