Autoantibodies against alpha-enolase (ENO1) are often detected in various 
infectious and autoimmune diseases. Anti-ENO1 antibody titers were reported to 
be associated with the severity of periodontitis in patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis. Because the enolase of the periodontal pathogen Treponema denticola 
(TdEno) has the highest homology with ENO1 among the enolases of 
human-associated bacteria, we hypothesized that anti-ENO1 autoantibodies 
produced during the immune response to TdEno may contribute to the progression 
of periodontitis and tested it in human and mouse systems. In human subjects 
with healthy periodontium or chronic periodontitis, a strong positive 
correlation between the levels of anti-TdEno and anti-ENO1 antibodies was 
observed. In addition, the purified anti-TdEno antibodies recognized ENO1 as 
well as TdEno in a dot blot, confirming the cross-reactivity between TdEno and 
ENO1. However, anti-ENO1 antibody titers were not associated with the severity 
of periodontitis. To further investigate the role of TdEno in the production of 
anti-ENO1 antibodies and the progression of periodontitis, mice received an oral 
gavage of P. gingivalis alone, subcutaneous immunization with TdEno alone, or 
both P. gingivalis oral gavage and TdEno immunization. Immunization with TdEno 
induced not only anti-TdEno but also anti-mouse Eno1 (mEno1) antibodies and 
increased the expression of TNFÎ± in the gingival tissues. However, alveolar bone 
loss was not increased by TdEno immunization. In conclusion, autoreactive 
anti-ENO1/mEno1 antibodies that are produced as byproducts during the antibody 
response to TdEno play a minimal role in the progression of periodontitis in the 
absence of rheumatoid arthritis.
