BACKGROUND/AIMS: Extensive osteoclast formation plays a critical role in bone 
diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, periodontitis and the aseptic 
loosening of orthopedic implants. Thus, identification of agents that can 
suppress osteoclast formation and bone resorption is important for the treatment 
of these diseases. Monocrotaline (Mon), the major bioactive component of 
crotalaria sessiliflora has been investigated for its anti-cancer activities. 
However, the effect of Mon on osteoclast formation and osteolysis is not known.
METHODS: The bone marrow macrophages (BMMs) were cultured with M-CSF and RANKL 
followed by Mon treatment. Then the effects of Mon on osteoclast differentiation 
were evaluated by counting TRAP (+) multinucleated cells. Moreover, effects of 
Mon on hydroxyapatite resorption activity of mature osteoclast were studied 
through resorption areas measurement. The involved potential signaling pathways 
were analyzed by performed Western blotting and quantitative real-time PCR 
examination. Further, we established a mouse calvarial osteolysis model to 
measure the osteolysis suppressing effect of Mon in vivo.
RESULTS: In this study, we show that Mon can inhibit RANKL-induced osteoclast 
formation and function in a dose-dependent manner. Mon inhibits the expression 
of osteoclast marker genes such as tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) 
and cathepsin K. Furthermore, Mon inhibits RANKL-induced the activation of p38 
and JNK. Consistent with in vitro results, Mon exhibits protective effects in an 
in vivo mouse model of LPS-induced calvarial osteolysis.
CONCLUSION: Taken together our data demonstrate that Mon may be a potential 
prophylactic anti-osteoclastic agent for the treatment of osteolytic diseases 
caused by excessive osteoclast formation and function.
