In this study of Th17/Treg cells, the therapeutic effect of Astragalus 
glycoprotein on collagen-induced arthritis in mice (CIA) was explored, and a 
basis for the clinical treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is provided. Sixty mice 
were selected for the establishment of a CIA mouse model, and were then randomly 
divided into a CIA model group, a hydrocortisone control group, a low, medium, 
and high dose group of Astragalus glycoprotein, respectively. The same number of 
control groups with same number of mice was established and after basic 
immunization, intraperitoneal injections were given once daily for two weeks in 
the treatment. At the end of the treatment, the mice in each group were selected 
and the proportion of Th17/Treg cells was detected by flow cytometry. The 
expression and positive expression of RORÔÅßt, Foxp3, P-STAT3 and P-STAT5 protein 
were detected by Western blot and immunohistochemistry. Astragalus glycoprotein 
was shown to potentially improve the diet and mental state, reduce the arthritis 
index score and improve the pathological state of synovial membranes in the 
mice. Moreover, flow cytometry results showed that, compared with the CIA model 
group, the proportion of Th17 cells in the four other groups of mice decreased, 
while the proportion of Treg cells increased. This difference was statistically 
significant (P less than 0.05). From the experiment, the following conclusions 
were drawn: Astragalus glycoprotein can reduce Th17 cells and their 
transcription factors in the peripheral blood of CIA mice, up-regulate Treg 
cells and their transcription factors, and correct the balance of Th17/Treg 
cells so as to achieve an effective of treatment for CIA mice.
