The leaves of Juniperus sabina (Cupressaceae) are used in traditional Uygur 
medicine for the treatment of rheumatism and arthritic pain. This study aimed to 
investigate the analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects of total flavonoids from 
leaves of Juniperus sabina (JSTF) on rodents. The anti-inflammatory activity was 
investigated using the carrageenan, egg albumin, or histamine-induced rat paw 
edema as well as xylene-induced ear edema, capillary permeability, and cotton 
pellet granuloma while the antinociceptive activity was evaluated using the 
mouse writhing, formalin, and hot-plate tests. JSTF (125, 250, 500 mg/kg) 
significantly inhibited xylene-induced ear edema in mice (inhibition ratio as 
16.22%, 40.67%, and 51.78%, respectively) and also significantly ameliorated 
acetic acid increased vascular permeability in mice (inhibition ratio as 11.63%, 
32.56%, and 53.49%, respectively). JSTF (250 and 500 mg/kg) gave significant 
reduction of carrageenin-induced paw oedema at the interval of 1 h and 5 h. 
Administration of JSTF (500 mg/kg) caused a significant anti-inflammatory effect 
against oedema induced by egg albumin or histamine at the interval of 0.5 h and 
4 h, and both which induced the paw oedema were also inhibited by JSTF (250 
mg/kg) at a point in 1, 2, or 3 h after the inflammation. Furthermore, JSTF 
(125, 250, and 500 mg/kg) produced time-course increase in pain threshold in 
hot-plate test also. JSTF produced concentration-dependent inhibition on 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) or 5-lipoxygenase (5-LO) activities in vitro, and their 
IC50 values were 31.92 and 129.26 μg/mL, respectively. Moreover, JSTF 
significantly caused a significant dose-dependent inhibition on acetic acid 
induced writhing response in mice (inhibition ratio as 23.27%, 36.91%, and 
50.76%, respectively). JSTF also significantly ameliorated formalin-induced pain 
in mice in the late phase on dose-dependent way. These results confirms the 
clinical use of J. sabina for treatment of rheumatoid arthritis in 
ethnomedicine, and its effective mechanism will be further studied in the 
future.
