Helminth infection induces Th2-biased immune responses and inhibitory/regulatory 
pathways that minimize excessive inflammation to facilitate the chronic 
infection of helminth in the host and in the meantime, prevent host 
hypersensitivity from autoimmune or atopic diseases. However, the detailed 
molecular mechanisms behind modulation on inflammatory diseases are yet to be 
clarified. Programmed death 1 (PD-1) is one of the important inhibitory 
receptors involved in the balance of host immune responses during chronic 
infection. Here, we used the murine model to examine the role of PD-1 in CD4+ T 
cells in the effects of Trichinella spiralis infection on collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA). Mice infected with T. spiralis demonstrated higher expression 
of PD-1 in the spleen CD4+ T cells than those without infection. Mice infected 
with T. spiralis 2â€‰weeks prior to being immunized with type II collagen 
displayed lower arthritis incidence and significantly attenuated pathology of 
CIA compared with those of uninfected mice. The therapeutic effect of T. 
spiralis infection on CIA was reversed by blocking PD-1 with anti-PD-1 antibody, 
associated with enhanced Th1/Th17 pro-inflammatory responses and reduced Th2 
responses. The role of PD-1 in regulating CD4+ T cell differentiation and 
proliferation during T. spiralis infection was further examined in PD-1 knockout 
(PD-1-/-) C57BL/6 J mice. Interestingly, T. spiralis-induced alteration of 
attenuated Th1 and enhanced Th2/regulatory T cell differentiation in wild-type 
(WT) mice was effectively diminished in PD-1-/- mice characterized by recovered 
Th1 cytokine levels, reduced levels of Th2 and regulatory cytokines and 
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ cells. Moreover, T. spiralis-induced CD4+ T cell proliferation 
suppression in WT mice was partially restored in PD-1-/- mice. This study 
introduces the first evidence that PD-1 plays a critical role in helminth 
infection-attenuated CIA in a mouse model by regulating the CD4+ T cell 
function, which may provide the new insights into the mechanisms of 
helminth-induced immunomodulation of host autoimmunity.
