C5a is an important pro-inflammatory peptide involved in complement activation, 
membrane attack complex formation, immune cell chemotaxis, and allergic 
responses. Osteoarthritis is a disease characterized by degenerative changes in 
articular cartilage. It has recently been found that inflammatory responses play 
an important role in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis and also in rheumatoid 
arthritis, where dysfunctional synoviocytes are involved. We performed a series 
of studies to verify our hypothesis that inhibition of C5a would prevent 
IL-1β-induced alternations in rat synoviocytes. In vitro studies were performed 
with RSC-364 cells to examine the role of C5a in the function of synoviocytes. 
RSC-364 cells (a rat derived synovial cell line) were treated with IL-1β, 
IL-1β+siC5a, IL-1β+PMX205 that is antagonist of C5aR, or left untreated. Cell 
cycle, proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, as well as levels of C5a, IL-17A and 
TNF-α expression were evaluated. We found that IL-1β could significantly 
increase the proliferation and invasion capabilities of RSC-364 cells, as well 
as of C5a IL-17A and TNF-α expression. In contrast, inhibition of C5a by siRNA 
or application of antagonist of C5aR PMX205 reversed the IL-1β-induced changes 
in C5a expression, cell cycle, proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, and cytokines 
releases. Taken together, our study results suggest that IL-1β can increase C5a 
expression in RSC-364 cells, and that C5a exerts a proinflammatory effect in 
RSC-364 cells. Inhibition of C5a might represent a new strategy for treating 
rheumatoid arthritis.
