Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) causes atrial remodeling that induces the occurrence 
and maintenance of atrial fibrillation (AF). In this study, we explored the 
influence of RA on atrial fibrillation and the potential therapeutic effects of 
resveratrol in a rat model. The following three groups of female Wistar rats 
(8 weeks old) were used in this study: control, collagen-induced arthritis 
(CIA), and resveratrol. Rats in the CIA and resveratrol groups were injected 
twice with type II collagen in Freund's incomplete adjuvant. Three weeks after 
the second injection, resveratrol (10 mg kg-1 day-1) was administered for 
4 weeks. Subsequently, atrial electrophysiological parameters were measured. 
Levels of inflammatory factors in the atria and serum were measured. Atrial 
histopathological changes were assessed using microscopy, and cardiomyocyte 
apoptosis and fibrosis were assessed using TUNEL and Masson's staining. 
Apoptosis-related and fibrosis-related proteins were assessed using Western 
blotting. Atrial adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and free fatty acid (FFA) levels 
were tested using ELISA. Glycogen accumulation and metabolism-related protein 
expression were assessed. AF inducibility and duration were markedly increased 
in CIA rats and were reduced by resveratrol. CIA also increased the atrial and 
serum IL-6 and TNF-a levels and induced atrial apoptosis and fibrosis, which 
were attenuated by resveratrol. Moreover, CIA induced the impairment of atrial 
energy metabolism by inhibiting the AMPK/PGC-1α pathway, which was reversed by 
resveratrol. Resveratrol protects against RA-induced atrial structural and 
metabolic remodeling, which may provide a new potential therapeutic treatment 
for RA-related AF.
