BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: 3'-Sialyllactose (3'-SL) is a safe compound that is 
present in high levels in human milk. Although it has anti-inflammatory 
properties and supports immune homeostasis, its effect on collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) is unknown. In this study, we investigated the prophylactic and 
therapeutic effect of 3'-SL on the progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in 
in vitro and in vivo models.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The anti-arthritic effect of 3'-SL was analysed with 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes in vitro and an in vivo mouse model of CIA. RT-PCR, 
Western blotting and ELISA were performed to evaluate its effects in vitro. 
Histological analysis of ankle and knee joints of mice with CIA was performed 
using immunohistochemistry, as well as safranin-O and haematoxylin staining.
KEY RESULTS: 3'-SL markedly alleviated the severity of CIA in the mice by 
reducing paw swelling, clinical scores, incidence rate, serum levels of 
inflammatory cytokines and autoantibody production. Moreover, 3'-SL reduced 
synovitis and pannus formation and suppressed cartilage destruction by blocking 
secretion of chemokines, pro-inflammatory cytokines, matrix metalloproteinases 
and osteoclastogenesis via NF-κB signalling. Notably, phosphorylation of p65, 
which is a key protein in the NF-κB signalling pathway, was totally blocked by 
3'-SL in the RA models.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: 3'-SL ameliorated pathogenesis of CIA by 
suppressing catabolic factor expression, proliferation of inflammatory immune 
cells and osteoclastogenesis. These effects were mediated via blockade of the 
NF-κB signalling pathway. Therefore, 3'-SL exerted prophylactic and therapeutic 
effects and could be a novel therapeutic agent for the treatment of RA.

© 2018 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of British Pharmacological Society.
