In the current concept of bacterial infections, pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns (PAMPs) derived from pathogens and damage-associated molecular patterns 
(DAMPs) released from damaged/necrotic host cells are crucial factors in 
induction of innate immune responses. However, the implication of DAMPs in 
apical and marginal periodontitis is unknown. Serum amyloid A (SAA) is a DAMP 
that is involved in the development of various chronic inflammatory diseases, 
such as rheumatoid arthritis. In the present study, we tested whether SAA is 
involved in the pathogenesis of periapical lesions, using human periapical 
surgical specimens and mice deficient in SAA and Toll-like receptors (TLR). 
SAA1/2 was locally expressed in human periapical lesions at the mRNA and protein 
levels. The level of SAA protein appeared to be positively associated with the 
inflammatory status of the lesions. In the development of mouse periapical 
inflammation, SAA1.1/2.1 was elevated locally and systemically in wild-type (WT) 
mice. Although SAA1.1/2.1 double-knockout and SAA3 knockout mice had redundant 
attenuation of the extent of periapical lesions, these animals showed strikingly 
improved inflammatory cell infiltration versus WT. Recombinant human SAA1 
(rhSAA1) directly induced chemotaxis of WT neutrophils in a dose-dependent 
manner in vitro. In addition, rhSAA1 stimulation significantly prolonged the 
survival of WT neutrophils as compared with nonstimulated neutrophils. 
Furthermore, rhSAA1 activated the NF-κB pathway and subsequent IL-1α production 
in macrophages in a dose-dependent manner. However, TLR2/TLR4 double deficiency 
substantially diminished these SAA-mediated proinflammatory responses. Taken 
together, the SAA-TLR axis plays an important role in the chronicity of 
periapical inflammation via induction of inflammatory cell infiltration and 
prolonged cell survival. The interactions of PAMPs and DAMPs require further 
investigation in dental/oral inflammation.
