Many bone diseases, such as osteoporosis and rheumatoid arthritis, are 
attributed to an increase in osteoclast number or activity; therefore, control 
of osteoclasts has significant clinical implications. This study shows how 
skullcapflavone II (SFII), a flavonoid with anti-inflammatory activity, 
regulates osteoclast differentiation, survival, and function. SFII inhibited 
osteoclastogenesis with decreased activation of MAPKs, Src, and cAMP response 
element-binding protein (CREB), which have been known to be redox sensitive. 
SFII decreased reactive oxygen species by scavenging them or activating nuclear 
factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), and its effects were partially 
reversed by hydrogen peroxide cotreatment or Nrf2 deficiency. In addition, SFII 
attenuated survival, migration, and bone resorption, with a decrease in the 
expression of integrin Î²3, Src, and p130 Crk-associated substrate, and the 
activation of RhoA and Rac1 in differentiated osteoclasts. Furthermore, SFII 
inhibited osteoclast formation and bone loss in an inflammation- or 
ovariectomy-induced osteolytic mouse model. These findings suggest that SFII 
inhibits osteoclastogenesis through redox regulation of MAPKs, Src, and CREB and 
attenuates the survival and resorption function by modulating the integrin 
pathway in osteoclasts. SFII has therapeutic potential in the treatment and 
prevention of bone diseases caused by excessive osteoclast activity.-Lee, J., 
Son, H. S., Lee, H. I., Lee, G.-R., Jo, Y.-J., Hong, S.-E., Kim, N., Kwon, M., 
Kim, N. Y., Kim, H. J., Lee, Y. J., Seo, E. K., Jeong, W. Skullcapflavone II 
inhibits osteoclastogenesis by regulating reactive oxygen species and attenuates 
the survival and resorption function of osteoclasts by modulating integrin 
signaling.
