Melicope ptelefolia has been traditionally used to treat rheumatism and fever. 
The present study aimed to investigate the therapeutic effect of 
3,5‑di‑C‑β‑D‑glucopyranosyl phloroacetophenone (βGP), a main component of 
M. ptelefolia, on rheumatoid arthritis (RA). A model of collagen‑induced 
arthritis (CIA) was established in mice using the RAW 264.7 murine macrophage 
cell line and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs). The clinical scores of 
arthritis, swelling, histopathological findings, and micro‑computed tomography 
in CIA mouse paws were assessed. The levels of anti‑type II collagen antibody 
and cytokines were determined in the plasma and cell culture supernatant, 
respectively. Protein and gene expression levels were analyzed by western blot 
and reverse transcription‑quantitative polymerase chain reaction analyses. βGP 
significantly decreased the gross arthritic scores of CIA mice and joint 
swelling, and decreased articular inflammation, cartilage degradation and bone 
erosion. However, βGP did not exert any effect on anti‑type II collagen 
immunoglobulin G plasma levels or inflammatory cytokine expression in 
macrophages. βGP significantly suppressed the expression of interleukin‑6 and 
leukemia inhibitory factor and decreased the phosphorylation of signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 3, and expression of receptor 
activator of nuclear factor‑κB ligand in tumor necrosis factor‑α‑stimulated MEFs 
and in CIA mouse paws. Osteoclast‑related gene expression was significantly 
reduced in CIA mouse paws. Taken together, βGP suppressed the development of RA 
by regulating the activation of synovial fibroblasts.
