Imbalance of Treg/Th17 and chronic synovitis characterized by the recruitment 
and infiltration of inflammatory cells are the typical features of rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). IL-6 promotes the differentiation and function of Th17 cells, 
which contributes to the imbalance of Treg/Th17 and aggravates lymphocytic 
infiltration in joints. DC32, a dihydroartemisinin derivative, was found to have 
anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive activities in previous study. The aim of 
this study is to evaluate the effects and mechanisms of DC32 in immunodeficiency 
and inflammatory infiltration of RA. In vivo, the antirheumatic effect of DC32 
was evaluated in a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model in DBA/1 mice. 
The percentages of Treg and Th17 and transcription of IL-6 in the spleen were 
assayed. In vitro, a coculture system of ConA-activated lymphocytes and 
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLSs) from rat with adjuvant arthritis (AA) was 
established. The effects and mechanisms of DC32 on synovitis were investigated. 
It was shown that DC32 inhibited footpad swelling and lymphocytic infiltration 
in mice with CIA and significantly restored the Treg/Th17 balance by reducing 
the transcription of IL-6 in splenocytes. DC32 significantly inhibited the 
lymphocyte-induced invasion and migration of FLSs by decreasing the secretion of 
MMPs (MMP-2, MMP-3) in vitro. DC32 also reduced the transcription of chemokines 
(CXCL12, CX3CL1) and IL-6 in FLSs, as well as IL-6 levels in the supernatant. 
These results demonstrated that DC32 may attenuate RA by restoring Treg/Th17 
balance and inhibiting lymphocytic infiltration through downregulation of the 
expression and transcription of IL-6. This study supports the potential of DC32 
to down-regulate IL-6 for the treatment of RA and other related autoimmune 
diseases.
