Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease and characterized by the 
excessive cell proliferation, abnormal cell cycle of lymphocytes and synovial 
cells. The therapeutic effects of curcumin in active RA patients were reported, 
but limited by its insolubility and rapid systemic elimination. Dimethyl 
curcumin (DiMC) is a metabolically stable analogue of curcum with 
anti-inflammatory property. In this study, liposomes encapsulated dimethyl 
curcumin (Lipo-DiMC) was prepared to improve the bioavailability and 
metabolic-stability; collagen induced arthritis (CIA) rat model was employed to 
investigate the effects of Lipo-DiMC treatments during CIA progress. Physical 
assessments and routine-blood-test were performed. Fresh spleen lymphocytes were 
isolated from normal, CIA and Lipo-DiMC-treated CIA rats; flow-cytometry for 
cell-cycle analysis, western-blotting for intracellular signal pathway protein 
expressions, gelatin-zymography for matrix-metalloproteases 2/9 (MMP-2/9) and 
GF-AFC for dipeptidyl-peptidase I (DPPI) activity assay. Compared with untreated 
CIA rats, Lipo-DiMC treatments relieved paw-swellings, suppressed the increments 
of immunocytes numbers and inhibited DPPI and MMP-2/9 over-activity in blood. 
Lipo-DiMC adjusted CIA-induced cell cycle dysfunction at G0/G1-phase and S-phase 
of spleen lymphocytes for CIA rats. The intracellular expression-trends of P38, 
P21, Bcl-2, JNK-1 and DPPI of spleen lymphocytes were observed during CIA 
progress with and without Lipo-DiMC administrations. Lipo-DiMC exhibited its 
therapeutic functions by attenuating CIA development in rats, associated with 
down-regulating CIA-induced lymphocytes numbers, inhibiting over-expressed of 
DPPI and MMP-2/9, and adjusting cell cycles. These findings provide a new 
insight into the mechanism of Lipo-DiMC treatment in CIA rat model and suggest 
that Lipo-DiMC could be considered as a potential drug for RA treatment.
