The angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) antagonist losartan has been confirmed 
to have a moderate anti-inflammatory effect in vitro and in vivo. However, how 
it affects immune cells in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is still unknown. We found 
that in human synovial tissues, AT1R is significantly expressed on T cells and B 
cells. Treatment with losartan (15 mg/kg) alone and in combination with a low 
dose of methotrexate (MTX 0.25 mg/kg/3 days) significantly suppressed the 
progression of CIA. Secondary paw swelling, joint destruction and the presence 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α and IFN-γ) in the serum were alleviated 
after treatment. The therapeutic effects of losartan were based on reduced 
T-cell and B-cell activation, specifically by decreased cell vitality and 
pro-inflammatory cytokine production. In addition, losartan combined with a low 
dose of MTX achieved a similar therapeutic effect, while protecting liver and 
kidney from MTX damage. Mechanistically, losartan inhibits the production of 
pro-inflammatory mediators, reduces the phosphorylation of p38, ERK, and p65, 
p50 nuclear transposition in T cells and B cells. Phosphorylation of JNK is not 
affected by losartan in the CIA rat model. losartan can be used as an effective 
RA treatment, which exhibits anti-arthritic effects potentially through 
down-regulating the phosphorylation of p38, ERK and signaling through NF-κB. 
While achieving similar anti-rheumatic effects, a combination therapy of 
losartan with a low dose of MTX, can protect from liver and renal damage caused 
by giving a high dose of MTX.
