Autoimmune diseases involve a complex dysregulation of immunity. Autoimmune 
diseases include many members [e.g., rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE)], and most of them are classified according to what 
organs and tissues are targeted by the damaging immune response. Many studies 
have focused on finding specific biomarkers for single autoimmune diseases, but 
so far, there are no universal biomarkers for detecting almost all autoimmune 
diseases. Serum miRNAs have served as potential biomarkers for detecting various 
diseases. The purpose of this study was to find a universal biomarker for 
diagnosing autoimmune diseases. Regulatory T cells (Tregs) play a crucial role 
in protecting an individual from autoimmunity, and depletion of Tregs in mice is 
considered a representative animal model of autoimmune disease. Two mouse models 
for Treg depletion, in which Treg was depleted by CD25mAb (in C57 mice) or by 
diphtheria toxin (DT) (in Foxp3DTR mice), were investigated, and 381 miRNAs were 
identified in the serum of mice with Treg depletion. A distinctive circulating 
miRNA profile was identified in Treg-depleted mice and in patients with 
autoimmune disease. QRT-PCR confirmation and ROC curve analysis determined that 
six miRNAs (miR-551b, miR-448, miR-9, miR-124, miR-148, and miR-34c) in the 
Treg-depleted mouse models and three miRNAs [miR-551b (specificity 73.5%, 
sensitivity 88.4%), miR-448 (specificity 82.4%, sensitivity 91.3%), and miR-124 
(specificity 76.5%, sensitivity 91.3%)] in patients with RA, SLE, Sjogren's 
syndrome (SS), and ulcerative colitis (UC) could serve as valuable specific 
biomarkers. These circulating miRNAs may represent potential universal 
biomarkers for autoimmune diseases diagnosis and prognosis.
