ω3-polyunsaturated free fatty acids (ω3-PUFAs), particularly docosahexaenoic 
(DHA) and eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), are thought to exert health promoting 
effects in metabolic and in inflammatory diseases. The molecular mechanisms of 
these beneficial effects are only partially understood. DHA and EPA activate 
Free Fatty Acid receptor 4 (GPR120/FFA4). Recently, the first orally available, 
synthetic ligand of FFA4, 
3-[2-chloro-5-(trifluoromethoxy)phenyl]-3-azaspiro[5.5]undecane-9-acetic acid 
("compound A"; cpd A) has been developed. Cpd A exhibits distinctly higher 
potency, efficiency, and selectivity at FFA4 than ω3-PUFAs and ameliorates 
insulin resistance and adipose tissue inflammation in the mouse. With 
GPR120/FFA4 activation believed to also attenuate tissue inflammation in 
autoimmune diseases, cpd A may also have a beneficial effect in these diseases. 
We have therefore addressed the therapeutic potential of cpd A in mouse models 
of three prototypical autoimmune diseases, specifically psoriasis, rheumatoid 
arthritis, and bullous pemphigoid. The effect of cpd A on the course of 
Aldara™-induced psoriasis-like dermatitis, K/BxN serum transfer arthritis, and 
antibody transfer pemphigoid disease-like dermatitis was scrutinized. Cpd A did 
not alter the course of Aldara-induced psoriasis-like dermatitis, K/BxN serum 
transfer arthritis, or antibody transfer pemphigoid disease-like dermatitis. Our 
results suggest that therapeutic regimens solely relying on FFA4 activation do 
not bear the potential to treat inflammatory diseases. With cpd A distinctly 
more potent in activating GPR120/FFA4 than ω3-PUFAs, this also suggests that 
GPR120/FFA4 activation by ω3-PUFAs does not significantly contribute to the 
health-promoting effects of ω3-PUFAs in autoimmune diseases.
