OBJECTIVE: The regulatory role of capsaicin-sensitive peptidergic sensory nerves 
has been shown in acute inflammation, but little is known about their 
involvement in T/B-cell driven autoimmune arthritis. This study integratively 
characterized the function of these nerve endings in the proteoglycan-induced 
chronic arthritis (PGIA), a translational model of rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: Peptidergic afferents were defunctionalized by resiniferatoxin (RTX) 
pretreatment in BALB/c mice, PGIA was induced by repeated antigen challenges. 
Hind paw volume, arthritis severity, grasping ability and the mechanonociceptive 
threshold were monitored during the 17-week experiment. Myeloperoxidase 
activity, vascular leakage and bone turnover were evaluated by in vivo optical 
imaging. Bone morphology was assessed using micro-CT, the intertarsal small 
joints were processed for histopathological analysis.
RESULTS: Following desensitization of the capsaicin-sensitive afferents, ankle 
edema, arthritis severity and mechanical hyperalgesia were markedly diminished. 
Myeloperoxidase activity was lower in the early, but increased in the late 
phase, whilst plasma leakage and bone turnover were not altered. Desensitized 
mice displayed similar bone spurs and erosions, but increased trabecular 
thickness of the tibia and bony ankylosis of the spine. Intertarsal cartilage 
thickness was not altered in the model, but desensitization increased this 
parameter in both the non-arthritic and arthritic groups.
CONCLUSION: This is the first integrative in vivo functional and morphological 
characterization of the PGIA mouse model, wherein peptidergic afferents have an 
important regulatory function. Their overall effect is proinflammatory by 
increasing acute inflammation, immune cell activity and pain. Meanwhile, their 
activation decreases spinal ankylosis, arthritis-induced altered trabecularity, 
and cartilage thickness in small joints.
