Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease primarily affecting 
joints and is featured by chronic synovial inflammation and angiogenesis. We 
employed a bovine type-II collagen (BIIC)-induced Sprague-Dawley rat arthritis 
model and an in vitro RA model based on interleukin (IL)-1β-stimulated rat 
synovial cells (RSC-364) to explore the preventive effect of resveratrol on RA 
and the underlying mechanisms. We found that resveratrol ameliorated 
BIIC-elicited synovitis and RA-related pathological hallmarks such as 
inflammatory cell infiltration and angiogenesis in the synovial tissue. Also, 
BIIC-stimulated rats displayed increased serum levels of proinflammatory 
cytokines and reactive oxygen species (ROS), as manifested by elevated serum 
malonaldehyde contents combined with reduced superoxide dismutase activity. It 
is noteworthy that resveratrol abolished BIIC-induced ROS and inflammation, 
confirming the antioxidative and anti-inflammatory actions of resveratrol in the 
context of RA. Furthermore, immunoblotting indicated that resveratrol 
downregulated the increase in the levels of hypoxia-inducible factor-1α (HIF-1α) 
and that of the activated phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein 
kinase (MAPK) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase in IL-1β-stimulated RSC-364 cells. 
Moreover, we observed that resveratrol-treated RSC-364 cells displayed both 
G0/G1 cell-cycle arrest and enhanced levels of apoptosis. Altogether, the 
present evidence established the preventive role of resveratrol in RA 
progression. Mechanistically, resveratrol inhibits MAPK signaling pathways, 
likely by reducing ROS accumulation, to suppress the inflammatory response and 
cell proliferation and to provoke cell apoptosis in the synovial tissue, along 
with mitigation of HIF-1α-mediated angiogenesis. Thus resveratrol appears to 
hold great potential for clinical translation as a novel RA therapeutic.
