The targeted delivery of therapeutics to sites of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has 
been a long-standing challenge. Inspired by the intrinsic inflammation-targeting 
capacity of macrophages, a macrophage-derived microvesicle (MMV)-coated 
nanoparticle (MNP) was developed for targeting RA. The MMV was efficiently 
produced through a novel method. Cytochalasin B (CB) was applied to relax the 
interaction between the cytoskeleton and membrane of macrophages, thus 
stimulating MMV secretion. The proteomic profile of the MMV was analyzed by 
iTRAQ (isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation). The MMV membrane 
proteins were similar to those of macrophages, indicating that the MMV could 
exhibit bioactivity similar to that of RA-targeting macrophages. A poly(lactic- 
co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticle was subsequently coated with MMV, and the 
inflammation-mediated targeting capacity of the MNP was evaluated both in vitro 
and in vivo. The in vitro binding of MNP to inflamed HUVECs was significantly 
stronger than that of the red blood cell membrane-coated nanoparticle (RNP). 
Compared with bare NP and RNP, MNP showed a significantly enhanced targeting 
effect in vivo in a collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) mouse model. The targeting 
mechanism was subsequently revealed according to the proteomic analysis, 
indicating that Mac-1 and CD44 contributed to the outstanding targeting effect 
of the MNP. A model drug, tacrolimus, was encapsulated in MNP (T-RNP) and 
significantly suppressed the progression of RA in mice. The present study 
demonstrates MMV as a promising and rich material, with which to mimic 
macrophages, and demonstrates that MNP is an efficient biomimetic vehicle for RA 
targeting and treatment.
