OBJECTIVES: To understand the pathophysiology of cardiovascular (CV) dysfunction 
in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is crucial, but limited by the paucity of animal 
models able to mimic CV impairments. We wanted to determine if the rat model of 
Pristane-Induced Arthritis (PIA) reproduced cardiometabolic impairments of RA.
METHODS: Dark Agouti rats received an injection of pristane or saline (controls) 
at day 0. Reactivity to vasoconstrictors and vasodilators was studied in aortic 
rings and mesenteric arteries at day 28 (acute) and day 120 post-induction 
(chronic phase). Circulating markers of inflammation, lipid and glucose levels, 
arthritis and radiographic scores were assessed.
RESULTS: In aortic rings, PIA induced a reduced vasoconstriction to 
phenylephrine and serotonin in both phases of the model. The relaxant effect of 
acetylcholine was decreased in PIA in acute (P < 0.05) but not in chronic phase. 
In mesenteric arteries, only the acetylcholine-induced vasorelaxation was 
impaired in PIA rats in the chronic phase (P < 0.001). Serum interleukin-6 
levels were higher, total cholesterol and triglycerides levels were lower in PIA 
in both phases (P < 0.001) whereas myeloperoxidase activity and blood glucose 
were unchanged. Adiponectine levels were lower in PIA in acute (P < 0.001) but 
not in chronic phase. Endothelial function correlated with interleukin-6, total 
cholesterol levels and arthritis score in aorta but not in mesenteric arteries.
CONCLUSIONS: As new information, PIA induces endothelial dysfunction in 
micro-/macro-vascular beds and low lipid levels, like in RA. This model of 
chronic arthritis might be useful to study CV pathophysiology and to screen new 
therapeutic options for reducing CV risk in RA.

Copyright © 2018 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier Masson 
SAS. All rights reserved.
