Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease characterized by the synovitis of 
joints and the modulation of chronic inflammation determined by increased levels 
of inflammatory cytokines. This study aimed to investigate the characteristics 
of the immunological profile of the cells of the synovial membrane and the 
expression of IL-10 and IL-17 in a rheumatoid arthritis rat model in order to 
provide a targetdirected treatment for immunological control. Eighty female 
Wistar rats were randomly divided into a rheumatic arthritis model group (model 
group) and a control group, 40 animals per group. After the successful 
rheumatoid arthritis rat model was obtained, 10 animals were sacrificed from 
each group every week starting from the third week till the sixth week and the 
expression levels of CD3, CD21, and CD68 in the synovial region along with the 
blood level of IL-10 and IL-17 were assessed. At the four stages after modeling, 
the expression of CD3 in the model group increased compared with the control 
group (P less than 0.05). The expression of CD21 was different between the model 
group and the control group, but the difference did not reach statistical 
significance (P>0.05). The expression of CD68 determined at weeks 4 and 5 after 
modeling was increased compared to the control group (P less than 0.05). At 6 
week after modeling, IL-10 levels in the model group were higher than those in 
the control group (P less than 0.05). At weeks 4 and 5 after modeling, the level 
of IL-17 in the model group increased compared to the control group (P less than 
0.05). The level of IL-17 increased with the increase of synovial inflammation 
in the rheumatoid arthritis-induced rats, and the level of IL-10 increased as 
the inflammation subsided, which shows that both cytokines are related to the 
occurrence and development of rheumatoid arthritis and its inflammation.
