Severe rheumatoid cachexia is associated with pronounced loss of muscle and fat 
mass in patients with advanced rheumatoid arthritis. This condition is 
associated with dyslipidemia and predisposition to cardiovascular diseases. 
Circulating levels of triglycerides (TG) and free fatty acids (FFA) have not yet 
been consistently defined in severe arthritis. Similarly, the metabolism of 
these lipids in the arthritic liver has not yet been clarified. Aiming at 
filling these gaps this study presents a characterization of the circulating 
lipid profile and of the fatty acids uptake and metabolism in perfused livers of 
rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis. The levels of TG and total cholesterol 
were reduced in both serum (10-20%) and liver (20-35%) of arthritic rats. The 
levels of circulating FFA were 40% higher in arthritic rats, possibly in 
consequence of cytokine-induced adipose tissue lipolysis. Hepatic uptake and 
oxidation of palmitic and oleic acids was higher in arthritic livers. The 
phenomenon results possibly from a more oxidized state of the arthritic liver. 
Indeed, NADPH/NADP+ and NADH/NAD+ ratios were 30% lower in arthritic livers, 
which additionally presented higher activities of the citric acid cycle driven 
by both endogenous and exogenous FFA. The lower levels of circulating and 
hepatic TG possibly are caused by an increased oxidation associated to a reduced 
synthesis of fatty acids in arthritic livers. These results reveal that the 
lipid hepatic metabolism in arthritic rats presents a strong catabolic tendency, 
a condition that should contribute to the marked cachexia described for 
arthritic rats and possibly for the severe rheumatoid arthritis.
