Neural interfaces have great potential to treat disease and disability by 
modulating the electrical signals within the nervous system. However, whilst 
neural stimulation is a well-established technique, current neural interfaces 
are limited by poor recording ability. Low signal amplitudes necessitate the use 
of highly invasive techniques that divide or penetrate the nerve, and as such 
are unsuitable for chronic implantation. In this paper, we present the first 
application of the velocity selective recording technique to the detection of 
respiration activity in the vagus nerve, which is involved with treatments for 
epilepsy, depression, and rheumatoid arthritis. Further, we show this using a 
chronically implantable interface that does not divide the nerve. We also 
validate our recording setup using electrical stimulation and we present an 
analysis of the recorded signal amplitudes. The recording interface was formed 
from a cuff containing ten electrodes implanted around the intact right vagus 
nerve of a Danish Landrace pig. Nine differential amplifiers were connected to 
adjacent electrodes, and the resulting signals were processed to discriminate 
neural activity based on conduction velocity. Despite the average single channel 
signal-to-noise ratio of - 5.8 dB, it was possible to observe distinct action 
potentials travelling in both directions along the nerve. Further, contrary to 
expectation given the low signal-to-noise ratio, we have shown that it was 
possible to identify afferent neural activity that encoded respiration. The 
significance of this is the demonstration of a chronically implantable method 
for neural recording, a result that will transform the capabilities of future 
neuroprostheses.
