OBJECTIVES: This study aims to examine the effects of sorafenib on a 
collagen-induced arthritis model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study included 50 randomly selected female 
Wistar-albino rats (8-10-week-old, weighing between 200 g to 250 g). The rats 
were divided into five equal groups as control, arthritis, etanercept, sorafenib 
high-dose, and sorafenib low-dose groups, respectively. Arthritis was induced by 
injecting mixed intradermal chicken type II collagen and incomplete Freund's 
adjuvant. Twenty-four hours after the advent of arthritis; rats in group 3 were 
injected subcutaneous etanercept (6 mg/kg/week), while those in groups 4 and 5 
were given sorafenib (10 or 30 mg/ kg/day) orally until they were sacrificed on 
the 34th day. The rat claws and trunk bloods were carefully examined to note 
perisynovial inflammation and cartilage/bone injury through histopathology. 
Tissue vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and VEGF receptor levels were 
carefully checked using western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Analysis of the experimental data showed that collagen-induced 
arthritis decreased in treatments groups after 12-13 days and 34th day in 
contrast with the arthritis group. Histopathological examination revealed broad 
perisynovial inflammation and cartilage/bone break down in the arthritis group. 
Compared to the control group, tissue VEGF and VEGF receptor levels increased in 
the arthritis group. Sorafenib and etanercept decreased tissue VEGF and VEGF 
receptor levels, perisynovial inflammation, damage of cartilage/bone.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that sorafenib treatment ameliorates 
collagen-induced arthritis with anti-VEGF effectiveness.
