TSH receptor (TSHR) autoantibody (TRAb) is the serological hallmark of Graves' 
disease (GD). Third-generation enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) using 
monoclonal TRAbs instead of TSH have been found useful for TRAb analysis 
recently. For the first time, a mouse monoclonal antibody (mAb) against TSHR was 
analyzed for TRAb detection and compared with human mAb M22 and TSH by the same 
competitive binding assay technique. A mouse monoclonal antibody (T7) binding to 
the TSH receptor and inhibiting TSH binding was generated and used for TRAb 
analysis in a third-generation ELISA. Obtained TRAb levels were compared with a 
second-generation TRAb assay employing bovine TSH and a third-generation assay 
with human mAb M22 as TSHR-binding reagents by investigating 89 patients with 
GD, 56 with Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT), 73 with non-autoimmune thyroid 
diseases, 17 with rheumatoid arthritis, and 100 healthy subjects. The T7-based 
TRAb ELISA did not reveal a significantly different assay performance (area 
under the curve [AUC]) in contrast to the TSH and M22-based TRAb ELISAs by 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis (AUC-T7 0.967, AUC-TSH 
0.972, AUC-M22 0.958, p > 0.05, respectively). After adjustment of cutoffs by 
ROC, all three TRAb ELISAs demonstrated sensitivities and specificities above 
89.9% and 96.0%, respectively. Both third-generation TRAb ELISAs showed a 
tendency for a higher prevalence of TRAb positives in HT in contrast to the 
second-generation ELISA. Mouse mAbs against the TSHR may be used for the 
reliable detection of TRAb by third-generation TRAb ELISA. The earlier reported 
higher sensitivity of third-generation TRAb ELISA in GD needs to be considered 
in the context of a slightly lower specificity regarding HT.
