INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune disease, which 
is accompanied with pain, hyperalgesia, and edema. Overproduction of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines and activation of intracellular signaling pathways 
sustain the RA symptoms considerably. There is a strong correlation between the 
expression of cytokines and opioid receptors in the arthritis process. Studies 
have shown that probiotics via different pathways such as reducing the levels of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines can alleviate inflammatory symptoms. Therefore, based 
on the crucial role of cellular and humoral immunity in induction of RA symptoms 
and potency of probiotics in modulation of immune responses, the purpose of this 
study was to investigate the effect of orally administered probiotics on the 
behavioral, cellular and molecular aspects of adjuvant-induced arthritis in male 
Wistar rats.
METHODS: Complete Freund's Adjuvant (CFA)-induced arthritis was caused by single 
subcutaneous injection of CFA into the rat's hind paw on day 0. Different doses 
of probiotics (1/250, 1/500 and 1/1000 [109 CFU/g]) were administered daily 
(gavage) after CFA injection. Hyperalgesia, edema, serum IL-1β levels, μ-Opioid 
Receptor (MOR) expression, and p38MAPK (Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase) 
activities were assessed on days 0, 7, 14 and 21 of the study.
RESULTS: The results of this study indicated the efficacy of probiotics in 
reducing hyperalgesia, edema, serum levels of Interleukin-1β, and p38MAPK 
pathway activity during different phases of arthritis as well as increasing the 
expression of MORs during chronic phase of CFA-induced arthritis.
CONCLUSION: It seems that probiotics can effectively reduce inflammatory 
symptoms by inhibiting the intracellular signaling pathway and cytokine 
production.
