BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)-related 
temporomandibular joint (TMJ) disorder remains unclear. Studies have reported 
the change of the TMJ after complete Freund's adjuvant (CFA) injection, which is 
consistent with osteoarthritis. However, few studies have reported that the 
tissue response of the TMJ in collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) can mimic RA. The 
present study was aimed to investigate the TMJ response in rat models by 
CFA-induced arthritis and CIA to verify the proper RA-related TMJ arthritis rat 
model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In total, 24 rats were randomly divided into four groups: 
(1) control group; (2) type I collagen injection group; (3) CFA-induced 
arthritis group; and (4) CIA group. Drugs were injected on Day 0, and the rats 
were sacrificed on Days 7 and 35. Next, TMJ tissue was collected for hematoxylin 
and eosin staining, and inflammatory gene (IL-1β and MMP3) expression was 
investigated.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the type I collagen injection group 
confirmed the negative inflammatory response through hematoxylin and eosin 
staining and IL-1βand MMP3 expression. Although CFA-induced arthritis and CIA 
groups showed inflammatory response (P < 0.05) compared with the control group, 
histological changes were different. The 7-day CFA-induced arthritis group 
showed adaptive changes and partly recovered after 35 days of induction. In 
contrast, 7- and 35-day CIA groups underwent a degenerative process.
CONCLUSION: Considering the study limitations, the CIA method is a proper method 
to study the mechanism of RA-related TMJ arthritis.
